The 5x7 format in practice
--------------------------

**By [QT Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com)** for
[largeformatphotography.info](%20/).

Once popular, the 5x7 format has fallen far behind in popularity behind
the 4x5 and 8x10 formats. This article looks at the advantages and
disadvantages of the 5x7 format, and gives a few practical pointers to
the resources available to the 5x7 photographer.

### The size and format advantage of 5x7

Compared to 4x5, 5x7 is almost twice as large. The image on the ground
glass is nice and big to look at, but not so big that it becomes
difficult to see as a whole, like in 8x10.

The additional size makes it easier to make high quality large prints.
Since you need to enlarge two times less, imperfections in equipment or
technique are less likely to show up. Some photographers find that the
improvement in B&W quality is quite visible at 16x20 (a 4x enlargment
from 4x5). In color, if digital printing is used, based on an on-film
resolution of 40 lpm and a requirement of 5 lpm for critical sharpness
at normal viewing distance, one would begin to notice a difference
between 4x5 and 5x7 starting from 30x40, which is large, but not
uncommonly large. I have made prints at the largest Lightjet size
(50x70) with excellent results.

However, it is when you are not enlarging that the larger negative
counts the most. Contacts from 5x7 are large enough to view comfortably,
whereas contacts from 4x5 appear small. If you are a B&W photographer
using 5x7, all you need to create satisfying visual gems is a lightbulb
and a contact printing frame. A 5x7 transparency on a light box displays
a sharpness and a brillance which are far more impressive than a 4x5
transparency.

The other difference is in aspect ratio. 5x7 is more elongated than 4x5.
For that reason, I find it more satisfying for photographing large
landscapes. Others have reported that the format fits architecture and
the human figure well too. However, photographers more interested in
abstracts will probably like the more squarish aspect ratio of 4x5
better.

Like many photographers, I learned using 35mm, and since the aspect
ratio of 35mm and of 5x7 are practically the same, I felt immediatly
comfortable composing with a 5x7. When using both formats
simultaneously, there is no aspect ratio confusion. I find 5x7 to be the
perfect companion to a 35mm system. In addition, with the advant of
high-end digital cameras, the gap between 35mm (digital) and 4x5 (film)
is narrowing. Using 5x7, I still have two systems with widely different
capabilities.

### The 5x7 camera versatility

If you move to 8x10, you'll almost certainly find yourself wanting a
ligher system to use on long hikes, backpacking trips, or travels. Then
you will have to maintain two systems, with the different lenses and
film holders, and think about which one to take on any given trip. On
the other hand, it is quite possible to do all your large format
photography with 5x7.

5x7 gear is not much more heavier or bigger than 4x5 gear that it
becomes difficult to work with. The tripod and camera can still be moved
with one hand, and it is still possible to backpack. I have traveled in
Europe on public transportation with my 5x7. I have backpacked
extensively with it, including on a week-long trip into one of the world
ultimate wilderness areas, Gates of the Artic National Park in Alaska,
and a trip down to the river (and up !) from the North Rim of the Grand
Canyon. I have fit it inside a kayak for two weeks in Glacier Bay.

With a reducing back, a 5x7 could be used as a nice 4x5 camera. It has a
longer extension, bigger bellows to reduce internal flare, and more
generous movements. Furthermore, a 5x7 can be used as a 6x17 (cm)
panoramic camera with an appropriate back. Such backs were rare (only
Art Pan made one, that you had to custom modify). However, recently
Keith Canham has presented a new model, with a battery operated advance
system. Weighting 2.2 lbs, and costing around \$1000, it will fit behind
the ground glass of many 5x7 that have 1 1/2 inches of clearance.

While the surface area is almost double, depending on the design, 5x7
gear is in general not twice as heavy as 4x5 gear. In some cases, the
difference in size and weight with 4x5 models is quite small, while 8x10
cameras are significantly heavier and bulkier. For instance, my own
Canham 5x7 weights less than popular 4x5 cameras such as the Zone VI,
Wisner Technical Field, Linhof Technika, and Arca-Swiss F-line.

One way to get started in the 5x7 camera is to use a 5x7 extension back
for 4x5. This was the route I initially took. However, these backs are
quite cumbersome, and have limitations, such as internal vigneting (you
are using bellows and a back opening made for 4x5) and the difficulty to
use very wide lenses, because of the additional depth of the back. Once
look at transparencies on the light table, it will be difficult to use
4x5 again, and you may be tempted to sell your 4x5 ! This is what
happened to me in 1995, after buying a 5x7 for my 4x5 in 1993. I've used
almost exclusively 5x7 since then, except for a couple of projects on
Polaroid film where I used the 4x5 reducing back on my 5x7.

### Cameras and lenses

The lightest 5x7 weights only 3 lbs and can be ordered from Peter
Gowland. Some fully featured 5x7 cameras (eg the Canhams, Lotus, Wisner
Pocket Expedition) are lighter than popular 4x5 cameras (eg Linhof,
Wisner Technical, Arca-Swiss). However, if you optimize 4x5 gear for
portability, you will usually get to 2/3 of the weight of a 5x7 system
of comparable capacity. Over the past few years, manufacturers seem to
have realized that weight matters, and a flurry of lightweight camera
designs has emerged. While five years ago, you couldn't find a fully
featured 4x5 field camera for less than 6lbs, now there are plenty in
the 4lbs-5lbs range, and the lightest ones are under 3lbs.

The 4x5 Canham DLC metal is 4 lbs. 11 oz. while the 5x7 Canham MQC is 5
lbs. 11 oz. On the other hand, the 5x7 versions of the Tachihara and the
Toho, two of the lightest 4x5 cameras, are both about twice the weight
of the 4x5 version.

While five years ago there was only a couple of field 5x7 made,
offerings have increased recently, with new flatbed cameras available
from Canham (classic woodfield T657 and metal MQC), Ebony
(SV57,SV57E,SV57UE,57SUE), Fine Art Photo Supply (Artworks, similar to
Tachi), Gandolfi(Traditional, Variant, All movements), Lotus (their most
popular camera: Rapid Field 5x7), Osaka, Shen-Hao (HZX57), Tachihara,
Walker (ABS 5x7 wide), Wisner ( Traditional, Technical Field, Pocket
Expedition). New monorail cameras available from Arca-Swiss (F-line,
Metric, Monolith), Linhof (Kardan), Sinar, Peter Gowland (all movements,
light), Toho (FC-57).

Some of the most affordable cameras on the used market such as the
Kodak, Burke and James, and Korona were made at a time when 5x7 was
still a popular format. They come with 4x5 and 5x7 backs, like the the
4x5 Canham wood, which is actually a 5x7 with a reducing back. Worth
noting on the used market are the Nagaoka and Anba Ikeda, which weight
only 3.75 lbs, less than almost all 2x3 cameras ! Nagoaka still makes
ultralight 5x7, but they are not imported to the US.

Lenses to cover 5x7 are plenty, and range from the Schneider 72XL
(equivalent to a 15mm lens in 35mm) to the Nikkor 1200 T, with plenty of
choice in between. Most of the 4x5 lenses, especially in the longer
focals, will cover 5x7. Taking into account the usable surface area of a
sheet of 5x7 film, you'd multiply your 35mm focal length by 4.7 to get
your 5x7 focal length. Most photographers will find that, with a few
exceptions, the lenses that they use in 4x5, starting from 90mm up, will
cover the 5x7 format.

The focals for 5x7 are 1.4 as large as those for 4x5 for the same angle
of view, which translates into larger lenses. However, a lot of 4x5
photographers use lenses which have more coverage they need. Examples of
such lenses are the 120/8 wide angle lenses (which are being displaced
by the Schneider 110XL), and the 210/5.6 plasmats, which all cover the
5x7 format with plenty of spare image circle.

### Film and holders

The cost is automatically higher due to larger size. This is the one
area where the choice in 5x7 is much less than in 4x5.

No preloaded film (ie Fuji Quickloads or Kodak Readyloads) are
available, so you have to use double cut film holders. These are
bulkier, heavier, require you to spend a significant amount of time
loading and unloading (usually at a time you'd rather go to bed to get
rested for that 5am sunrise), are more prone to catching dust, and more
difficult to track. You cannot use Polaroid film in this format either
(it's available for 4x5 and 8x10). All the digital scanning backs are
designed for 4x5.

The main problem for many is that the number of emulsions available is
extremely limited in color in their country. In particular, those
emulsions can be difficult to get in the US market.

Kodak recently dropped several of their 5x7 emulsions. As of 2005, in
the US, you can get only Kodak Ektachrome Professional EPR 64 and EPY
64T as transparency films. Those are pretty old films which have a
following for product photography but that few landscape photographers
would find satisfying. In addition Kodak 160NC (negative) is also
available in 5x7.

Fuji makes Velvia, Astia, and Provia F in 5x7, but it is not officially
imported in the US. International sources include:
http://www.unicircuits.com/shop/ (in Japan) http://www.bobrigby.com/
(UK) http://www.robertwhite.co.uk/ (UK) however, note that in any case
the price will be above \$5/sheet. In the US the most convenient source
is Badger Graphics, however, they have to buy it retail in Japan, and as
a result, you'll also pay \$5-\$6/sheet (Jeff says they don't make money
on the transaction). Note that due to lack of demand, Badger doesn't
import Astia.

In B&W, the choice is better, with Kodak Tri-X, TMX, Ilford FP4+ and
HP5+, and Bergger BPF200, to choose from in the US. Other available
European films in 5x7, all currently imported by J and C, nclude Forte
400, Efke PL25, Efke PL100, and Rollei R3. B&H offers Fomapan 100 and
200 in 5x7 by special order. Arista films from Freestyle in Los Angeles
have been found to have identical characteritics to Ilford films. T-Max
100 film in 5x7 size is available as Nov 2001 a special order in single
50 sheet box qualities from a Kodak registered sales dealer (the Kodak
order number is \#822-6334). The same 5x7 sheet film in T-Max 400
requires a 30 box minimum.

In Europe, both 5x7 and 13cmx18cm coexist and you can get both sizes
(but metric is easier to find). The size of the film is different (5x7
is 12.7cm x 17.8cm and the difference is beyond the internal dimensional
tolerance), therefore the holders are too, however, the exterior
dimensions of the holders are the same so you don't have to modify the
camera. In the US, Calumet sells 13x18 film holders (that are actually
makes by the same factory that produces 5x7 holders), and J and C photo
sell European 13x18 film. There is also the option of buying over the
internet over suppliers such as Nord Photo in Germany. The choice of
13x18 film is quite large and includes Kodak Portra 100 T,E100G, E100VS,
Agfa RSX 100, Fuji NPS (negative), Provia F, Astia F, Velvia F, Velvia.
Prices are comparable to the retail price for 5x7 film in the US before
it was discontinued in the late 1990s, eg. 40-50 Euro. Using 13x18 film
may possibly be the best option for color photographers. Ted Harris has
offered to [facilitate a group
order](http://largeformatphotography.info/lfforum/topic/502165.html).

I chose to cut myself the film from 8x10. This is done neatly with a
Rotatrim Mastercut II, a rotary blade cutter, and while it sounds a
delicate task at first, it is in fact very easy to do. I wouldn't use
anything else, as precision is critical. One tip: I've found that it is
difficult to align the film with minute precision, I cut slightly
smaller than 5x7 to be sure there won't be problems to fit holders.
Because of that, you'll need to cut a sheet of 8x10 three times to make
two 5x7. If you use only one kind of film, it is not necessary to punch
a new notch. I just keep the film emulsion facing the top of the film
box. I have misloaded film only one time, out of more than a thousand of
sheets cut. It takes me between 30 min to one hour to cut 25 8x10
sheets. It's not that tedious if you listen to music at the same time.
The problem is that while you don't have to worry about finger marks
which are washed away by the developper, you increase significantly the
chance of getting dust on your film, which in turn can cause surface
scratches as you are traveling.

With this method, you can use any emulsion which is available in 8x10.
The cost of a sheet of color transparency film is \$3-\$4 if 8x10 is
bought in boxes of 50. Personally, I located a large batch of
out-of-date, cold-stored 8x10 Astia that I bought at a very low price,
so I won't have to look for film for maybe one more decade. At this
point, my main problem is that I have only 5x7 film boxes that date from
the good old eays days when EPP and Velvia were available in the US, and
although I have a large number of them, each year they get more worn
out.

### Processing, Viewing, Scanning, and Printing

All commercial labs will process 4x5, but there are a number of them
which don't have racks for 5x7. The price of processing 5x7 is often
twice as much as 4x5, and comparable to processing 8x10. Most will find
it necessary to use mail order processing, especially with the closure
of many E6 commercial labs caused by the widespread adoption of digital.
I have used Flatiron Color Lab, Holland photo, and Fleshtone LA.

The price of commercial scanning and printing is independent from the
transparency size. An excellent drum scan on the Heidelberg scanners,
resulting in a 300 MB file can be had for \$80 from several sources,
including West Coast Imaging and Pictopia.

If you want to scan yourself, for 5x7, the good news is that you don't
need the same scanning resolution as for 4x5 to get equivalent results.
1800 dpi, within reach of most current flatbed scanners, will yield that
300MB file with 5x7. Although the choice in scanners for 5x7 film is
adequate, 4x5 photographers have more choices. Introduced in 2004, The
Epson 4870 was the first popular unit that had a transparency unit large
enough for 5x7. Replaced by the 4990, which can scan up to 8x10, it can
be had for less than \$400. Prior to that, the Epson units were limited
to 4x5 for many years. The recent Microtek i900 scanner in the same
price range will also handle 5x7. I choose the Epson over the Microtek
because its digital ICE (automatic dust removal) works on
transparencies, while Microtek's ICE works only for reflective
materials, however I was not able to get this feature to work on large
scans. The advantage of the Microtek would be a drawer for glassless
scanning. Up to a budget of \$1000, there are a few 8x10 scanners (such
as the Microtek 1800) which are said to be better than the Epsons. While
there are other options available in 4x5 in between, for 5x7, the next
step are the high-end Imacon scanners. However, note that with the
Imacons the resolution drops with film size. So if you have a piece of
5x7 film, the largest file you can produce is about 230MB. This might
suffice in practice, but it is not very satisfying for a scanner of that
price. The FT848 scanner will scan the 5x7 transparencies at a maximum
resolution of 1600 dpi. Their latest and greatest, the FT 949 will only
scan up to 4x5.

If you buy a flatbed scanner, you will most likely find that while it
comes with holders for 4x5, and maybe 8x10, there are no holders for
5x7. My solution is to cut a piece of matboard with a 5x7 opening, and
tape the transparency by its four edges with some stretch. The tension
helps with film flatness, to the point that some 4x5 users have reported
obtaining sharper scans with such custom holders than with the stock
holder. Just laying out the transparency on the glass is not optimal for
two reasons: the possibility of Newton rings, and the fact that the
focus distance of the scanner is above the glass. In fact, this focus
distance is not carefully controlled on consumer scanners, and some
users have found that while it is close to the distance to the stock
holders, it is not exactly equal. To experiment with various holder
thickness, matboard is too thick, and a possibility is to use thin
sheets of black plastic from a clear book folder, sold in stationary
stores.

To view 5x7 color transparencies, I recommend the Hakuba KLV-5700
viewer. It is ultra slim with even illumination, and can be used either
with an AC adaptor or on batteries. The viewing area is exactly 5x7, so
there the distracting bright border is minimal. The only drawback of
this viewer is that it is not as bright as some thicker ones. Hakuba
products are not widely sold in the US, so see
http:/&gt;www.hakubausa.com

If you work in B&W, you'll most likely do your own processing, so you
won't incur high costs. You can easily find a 5x7 B&W enlarger on the
used market. The Zone VI enlarger will work with this format, and seems
to be the most popular new 5x7 enlarger.

### In conclusion

5x7 is an interesting compromise between 4x5 and 8x10.

If you are a B&W photographer, I believe that by steping up to 5x7,
you'll lose only the portability of some lightweight 4x5 systems, and
you'll have much to gain.

The color 5x7 photographer faces additional problems related to scarcity
of film and processing, which do not affect the 4x5 photographers. The
gains from the larger transparency are less tangible, unless you plan to
make huge prints.

However, if you are still tempted by a larger format than 4x5, 5x7 can
replace entirely 4x5 and 8x10 so that you can work in a single format,
and not worry about which camera to take regardless of whether you are
shooting next to your car, or backpacking for a week.

#### [View/Add comments](http://largeformatphotography.info/lfforum/topic/503911.html)
