Large Format FAQ: mistakes

What NOT to do in large format ?
--------------------------------

**by [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for [the Large
Format Page](.)**

There are more ways to ruin a photograph than you would think. All these
potentially fatal mistakes are specific to large format, in the sense
that most of them are impossible, or quite rare with 35mm and MF
cameras. Here are some of them, and how to avoid making the mistake.
Additional suggestions welcome.

-   Mistakes make while taking the photograph
    -   [lens not stopped down](#1)
    -   [shutter speed not adjusted](#1)
    -   [dark slide removed before closing the lens](#1)
    -   [holder with exposed film used](#1)
    -   [holder with no film used](#1)
    -   [camera fired with no film holder inside](#1)
    -   [dark slide not removed before the exposure](#1)
    -   [dark slide put back the wrong side](#1)
    -   [dark slide not put back](#1)
    -   [rear dark slide pulled out](#1)
    -   [vignetting due to internal blocking](#2)
    -   [vignetting due to excessive movements](#2)
    -   [vignetting due to compendium shade/filters](#2)
    -   [lack of depth of field](#3)
    -   [poor focussing](#3)
    -   [camera controls unlocked](#4)
    -   [camera shaken by the wind](#5)
    -   [subject shaken by the wind](#6)
    -   [reciprocity failure miscompensated](#7)
    -   [filter factor not taken into account](#7)
    -   [bellows factor not taken into account](#7)
    -   [wrong f-stop scale (with convertibles or Nikkor telephoto
        lenses)](#15)
    -   [change in light/subject not taken into account](#8)
    -   [cable release / shade showing in picture](#8)
    -   [mysterious double image with long exposure](#16)
-   Pre and post exposure mistakes
    -   [film loaded backwards](#9)
    -   [film misloaded](#10)
    -   [dusk got on the film](#11)
    -   [forgot at home tripod/holders/essential camera part](#12)
    -   [darkslide accidentaly opened](#13)
    -   [wrong developpment (ie color instead of B&W, or +1 instead of
        -1) applied to the film](#14)
    -   [flipping the light on before closing film boxes](#15)
-   Defective equipment
    -   [light leaks in camera or bellows](#17)
    -   [light leaks in holders](#17)
    -   ground glass mis-alignment
    -   film plane mis-aligned in holders
    -   erratic shutter

[]{#1}

### To avoid fatal confusions

Be sure to operate in a systematic way, to always do the actions in the
same sequence, and to double check everything. After I am done focussing
and composing, the first thing I do is close then lens. Then I meter,
and set the f-stop and shutter speed. Then I insert an holder, making
sure it is white. By prefiring the shutter before pulling out the dark
slide, I make sure that the lens is closed and that an (approximatively)
adequate shutter speed was dialed. By checking that I put the black side
of the dark slide back, before removing the holder, I make sure that the
exposure was done. []{#2}

### To avoid vignetting

Always check through the cut corners of the ground glass in doubt. It is
useful to know the situations where problem can occur. For instance with
my camera, I have to be careful if I don't use bag bellows and do tilts
or falls in verticals. []{#3}

### To avoid lack of sharpness from focussing

Use a lupe to focus, and check very carefully each part of the
ground-glass. In particular, be aware when using tilt that the depth of
field around the focus plane is significantly reduced as compared to the
case when no movements are used, so don't forget to check the top of the
trees or hills. If there are areas in the image which still appear
unsharp after applying movements, stop down until they appear sharp, and
then add one f-stop. This might be difficult to judge with a dim image.
Better to loose some optical performance by overstopping than to have an
area which is lacking critical sharpness. Wide-angle lenses usually have
to be stopped down to f22 for optimum performance anyway, whereas other
lenses have to be stopped down a couple of f-stops. It is not a good
idea to use a lens near full aperture because of the possible alignments
problems. []{#4}

### To avoid unlock controls

Lock all the controls as you unfold the camera. Unlock only those that
you use. Double check that camera controls and tripod controls are
locked before inserting the film holder (which would otherwise cause the
back standard to move and force you to refocus). []{#5}

### To avoid camera shake

Use an unbrella to shield the camera from the wind. For long lenses,
techniques comparable to long-tele tricks like double tripods or
extension arms to support the standard help. [More
details](stability.html). []{#6}

### To avoid subject shake

Be patient enough to wait for lulls. Using the fastest speed (compatible
with the desired depth of field) helps too. []{#7}

### To avoid underexposure

If you are going to do a long exposure (several seconds), a close-up, or
use filters, think about the compensation to apply. Reciprocity
compensation tables are available for most popular films. There are
[several methods](bellows-factor.html) to accont for bellows factor.
[]{#8}

### To avoid last second problems

Be sure to look at your subject until the moment you make the exposure !
[]{#10}

### To avoid improper loading

You must feel the film with your fingers to make sure it is well sitted
in the rails. The things I do is feel the extremities of the rails,
which ensures that the film is beneath. I also lift the film from below
and makes sure it is catched by the rails. See [detailled description of
loading](loading.html) []{#9}

### To avoid loading backwards

Make sure you feel each notch at the right place. If you are holding the
long side of the holder perpendicular to you that's the right corder on
the upper side of the film. If you are holding the holder another way,
be careful.

Once you have shot your film backwards, it will appear underexposed by 2
or 4 stops, and if you are shooting color it will have a predominant red
color cast because it has been filtered by the base. Color film is
ruined. B&W can be salvaged: " Develop in a very active developer such
as Xtol or Microphen -- use a concentrated dilution, not a weak one,
particularly with Xtol -- and add 30-40% to the standard development
time for your film. It'll be okay. **Thor Lancelot Simon**" []{#11}

### To avoid dust

Some say that the only solution is to use preloaded film (in 4x5), and
recommend to shoot a backup when there are large tonal areas which would
be ruined by dusk. A picture can be also saved by
[spotting](dust-spotting.html). I try to avoid using the changing dome
whenever possible, by using bathrooms or closets at night, sealing the
openings with the dark cloth. My procedure is the following. I clean
each holder with a paintbrush and sometimes canned air. I insert all the
darkslides with the white sides facing out, leaving only about one inch
open, and I stack them on top of each other. This minimizes the chance
of the dusk getting on the holders or inside. I open the film box, but
keep the film between the two cardboard sheets, and put it on my knees.
I extract each sheet of film only to load it, which minimizes the time
it can collect dust. When the loading is done, I put the holders
directly into plastic ziplocks. []{#12}

### To avoid forgetting equipment

Put everything in the same place, and use a check list. []{#13}

### To avoid opening holders

Make sure to reposition the tabs which prevent accidental opening. They
tend to come loose very easily. Be careful whenever you grab your
holders. []{#14}

### To avoid cross-processing

Write on a separate sheet of papers the nature of each sheet exposed
(and, if you are really serious, exposure information, etc...) []{#15}

### To avoid other dumb mistakes...

Triple check and good luck :-) []{#16}

### The mysterious double image

After long exposures, if you are not lucky, you might observe a double
image on all or part of the film. There seem to be four distinct causes:

-   pinhole in bellows or lensboard (only with very small f-stop)
-   periodic vibrations
-   shifting of the film, which may not have been firmly seated in the
    bottom of the holder. to avoid, give a rap to the holder before
    exposure to make sure the film is already shifted if it's going to.
-   popping or bowing, due to humidity or temp changes as the film was
    freely exposed to air inside the camera instead of the somewhat
    air-tight film holder with a closed darkslide. to avoid, remove the
    darkslide and wait something like 5 or 10 minutes before exposure.

(based on [comments by Paul Butzi and Jonh Sparks](double-image.html).)
[]{#17}

### Light leaks

Test all the suspects elements ([more details](leaks.html)). It can be
holders, camera, or the combination of both. Some sort of flare, due to
the large image circle light bouncing off belows, can also look like a
leak. Readyload holders require [particular
precautions](holders.html#readyloads). Covering the camera with the dark
cloth while the film is in it might help.

#### [View or add comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/mistakes.html)
