Large format photography: about the 4x10 and film holders

About the 4x10 format and film holders
--------------------------------------

**By [Kerry Thalmann](http://www.thalmann.com/) for
[largeformatphotography.info](/) (compiled by QTL)**

### The 4x10 format

I shoot 4x10 and love the format. I shoot color transparency film in two
different fashions. The first is "true 4x10" - meaning I cut the film in
half in the dark prior to exposure, load it into 4x10 holders and shoot
it with a 4x10 camera. The second is to shoot two 4x10 images on a
single sheet of 8x10 film using conventional 8x10 holders, a split
darkslide, and an older 8x10 camera (Eastman Commercial All-Metal).

I like the aspect ratio of the format, and I also like the fact that
many lenses I already had covered the format. It's possible to assemble
a very wide range of lenses that cover this format, and still avoid the
heavy, bulky \#3 shutter necessary for many 8x10 lenses (much like 5x7
in this regard). Like I said above, there are many very good, reasonably
compact lenses, both new and old, that barely or don't quite cover 8x10.
These make wonderful choices for use on the 4x10 format.

For prints, I "enlarge" to either 8x20 or 12x30 digitally using a
flatbed scanner and an Epson 2200 printer. One nice thing about the 4x10
format is that you can get rather large prints using a relatively
affordable desktop inkjet printer. On the other hand, I've seen a number
of 4x10 contact prints from other photographers. With the right subject
and materials, the results can be exquisite. A print doesn't always have
to be huge to hold one's attention.

Drawbacks: with light leaks (see next section), a lack of a market for
my stock images (6x17 is BY FAR the preferred format for panoramic stock
sales), a lack of supporting products (4x10 transparency sleeves,
Quickmounts, etc.), at one point I gave up on the format in favor of
6x17.

*4x10 "sees" the same way that 8x10 does. David Fokos. That is to say,
if you use a 210mm. lens for 8x10 (I use a Rodenstock Sironar-S, which
just barely covers), your 4x10 shots will have the same wide-angle
perspective. A 90mm lens would be \*incredibly\* wide-angle on the 4x10,
roughly the equivalent of a 45mm lens on a 4x5. **David Fokos***

David makes a very good point. I bought the 115mm Grandagon specifically
for 4x10 (even before I bought the camera). This decision was made based
on the mentality prevelant on many panaorama cameras: stick the widest
lens on the camera that will cover the film format and call it a
panorama. Once I actually started using the camera, I found that in most
situations, the 115mm on 4x10 was just too wide for my tastes. Although
in some situations, it was the only lens that would work (when you need
it, you NEED it). A 115mm or 120mm would probably be a good 4x10 focal
length for architectural interiors or large group photos in the banquet
tradition, but I found that I didn't use it as much as I thought I would
for 4x10 landscapes.

On a related note, compositionally, 4x10 (or any panoramic format) is
much different than the traditional 4x5 or 8x10 formats. In 4x5, I like
to use wide angle lenses (75mm or 90mm) to emphasize the foreground to
draw the viewer into the photograph. This is especially effective in
vertical compositions. In 4x10, the main compositional elements tend to
lie in middle third vertically acrossed the entire 10" width of the
film. In my experience, strong leading foregrounds just don't work well
in a panoramic format. Therefore, I found myself using the ultrawide
focal lengths less that I do in 4x5, and found myself using the less
radical wide angles (165mm and 210mm) along with the more normal 300mm
focal length. The 450mm focal length was especially interesting. I use
my 210mm lens a lot on 4x5 (probably my most used focal length in that
format along with the 135mm). The 450 gave similar horizontal coverage
in the panoramic format. It provided some interesting compositions in
4x10, but I didn't rely on it as much as I do the 210mm in 4x5. It is
interesting to note that if I was limited to one focal length in the
4x10 format I would choose the 210mm, the same focal length I would
choose for 4x5. Although the 210mm Nikkor W I had for 4x5 was adaquate
for 4x10, I would recommend something with a larger image circle (210mm
Super Symmar HM, 210mm Sironar W if you can afford it, 210mm Fujinon W,
210mm Angulon or 210mm f9 Computar or even 190mm Wide Field Ektar if you
are on a more modest budget) if you plan to shoot a lot of 4x10.

4x10 is a wonderful, neglected format. Unfortunately, there are two
competing standards for the film holders and that adds to the confusion
(can you imagine what it would be like if different brands of 4x5 or
8x10 cameras required custom made holders of differing dimensions).
There aren't a lot of us out there shooting in this beautiful size - so
you can consider yourself part of an exclusive, elite group of
photographers determined to do something just a little bit different
than most.

### 4x10 vs split 8x10 vs 4x5 stitched

8x10 holders and a lot easier to find and cheaper than 4x10 holders.
There are plenty of used 8x10 holders available on eBay at reasonable
prices. To me, that's the key to shooting 4x10 is getting holders. The
Canham 4x10 holders are well made and the most reasonably priced new
holders (about \$95 each). For comparison, new 8x10 Fidelity holders are
about \$60 each - and you only need half as many for the same number of
shots. Of course, if you can get an ultralight 8x10, like the Phillips
Explorer, you can have the best of both worlds - a lightweight camera
and affordable holders.

*Split darkslides are sold by
[Bender](http://www.benderphoto.com/4x10pa.htm) and
[Toho](http://www.toho-machine.co.jp/Panorama.htm), but [it is easy to
make it
yourself](http://largeformatphotography.info/lfforum/topic/497643.html).*

The procedure would be more lengthy but not more complicated than
normal:\
For image 1:

-   frame the scene using the top 4x10 half of the 8x10 ground glass
    (assuming horizontal panorama),
-   Put in 8x10 film holder.
-   Pull dark slide and replace with special half fram dark slide with
    the openning at the top.
-   Make exposure.
-   Replace normal dark slide.

For image 2:\

-   frame the scene using the bottom half of the 8x10 ground glass
-   Put in the same 8x10 film holder with the same side to the lens.
-   Pull dark slide and replace with special half fram dark slide with
    the openning at the bottom.
-   Make exposure.
-   Replace normal dark slide.

This way you get two 4x10 exposures on each 8x10 sheet of film (both
will likely be processed the same, though you could cut the film after
exposure and before processing). A single holder gives you 4 exposures.
All equipment is standard except for the extra homemade cut darkslide.
**Sandor**. Todd Caudle (spliting 4x5 into 2x5), recommends [rotating
the back](http://www.photo.net/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg?msg_id=003xgh)
instead.

Deardorff also made 4x10 slider boards for their 8x10 camera backs. In
fact, that's how I got started shooting 4x10. When I sold my Deardorff,
I kept the 4x10 slider board. I still have it. It also fits some 8x10
Kodak backs. It's a very simple piece of wood, painted black with a
simple rabbet joint on each end, and two recessed "thumb holes" (not
really holes, as they don't go all the way through the board) for
sliding it back and forth. If you have a Deardorff camera and are even
slightly handy, you could make one yourself. If I remember correctly,
the grooves for the 4x10 slider are offset from the grooves for the 5x8
slider. This would allow using one of each to shoot four 4x5 images
(minus margins) on a single sheet of 8x10 film. Kind of a poor man's
reducing back.

I found two minor, but irritating problem with this method. First, 8x10
cameras ARE bigger, bulkier and heavier. Granted the Deardorff at about
13 - 14 lbs. isn't exacty a lightweight 8x10, but still, given
comparable designs, a 4x10 camera will save you a few pounds and a fair
amount of bulk. The dedicated 4x10 I had was a Wisner Technical. The
basic chassis was the same as a 4x5 Technical (actually, I bought the
camera as a 4x5 Technical and bought the 4x10 back/bellows as an
accessory). Again, the Wisner Technical isn't exactly a lightweight 4x5
by current standards, but in the 4x10 configuration weighed about 7 lbs.
I believe Wisner now has 4x10 converstion kits for his lighter weight
models (Expedition and/or Pocket expedition). These models, in 4x10
configuration should be a couple pounds lighter than a 4x10 Technical
(the Technical is Wisner's heaviest 4x5). By building around a 4x5 base,
and having a back that's 1/2 the size, a 4x10 camera can be
significantly smaller and lighter than an 8x10. Not important for
everyone, but an issue for those who hike (I ONCE did a 23 mile day hike
with my 4x10 Wisner, big heavy tripod, holders, lenses, etc. It was hard
enough with the 4x10, I wouldn't wanted to attempt it with an 8x10).

The second issue I had was that it was necessary to shift the lens up
and down to center the image on the 1/2 of the 8x10 film I was using.
This then limits the amount of effective front rise you have left. If
you have lenses with huge coverage, you can probably just shoot both
halves with the lens in its normal neutral position. Or, if you have a
camera with gobs of front rise, this isn't an issue. I was using lenses
that didn't quite, or just barely, covered 8x10 (115mm Granadgon-N,
165mm Angulon, 210mm Nikkor W, 300mm Nikkor M), so it was always
important that I recentered the lens for each shot to avoid vignetting.
Not a show stopper, just a little convenient.

In spite of these issues, for me, the dedicated 4x10 solution was even
more of a hassle. At the time, the only 4x10 film holders I could get to
fit my Wisner were the Mido II type. These were small and light, but
were very prone to light leaks (some operator induced, most due to
manufacturing defects in the holders). I sent my holders back twice to
have them repaired/replaced. Each time the problem got better, but was
still unacceptable. Cutting my own film was a hassle I was prepared to
live with, but cutting my own film and then having 1/2 the exposures
ruined by light leaks, was not. Of course, now there are better 4x10
holders on the market, so this is probably a non-issue for anyone
entering this format these days. BTW, the 4x10 Wisner was a fine camera,
it was just the hodlers I disliked. The Canham 4x10 holders were MUCH
better, but bulkier and heavier. The current wooden Wisner holders
should be much better than the old Mido IIs I was using.

Finally, cutting the film WAS a hassle. Not impossible, not even
difficult, just tedious. And, it exposed the film to a much greater
likelyhood that dust would settle on it during the cutting, notching,
loading process. At the time I entered the 4x10 format, Ilford sold
pre-cut FP4 and HP5 film, but I was shooting color transparencies, so I
had to cut my own Velvia. When I bought my camera, I was hopeful that
4x10 was an emerging standard (Wisner had just entered the market as the
second major manufacturer to offer a 4x10 camera, Ilford was selling
precut 4x10 film...). I hoped the format would catch on and Fuji, Kodak,
etc, would start offering precut 4x10 film. Well, history tells us I was
naively optimistic in this regard. I don't believe Ilford still offers
precut film in the 4x10 size (or maybe they do, but it's special order
only). If not, and you don't want to cut your own, Photo Warehouse will
do it for you at prices that are quite reasonable (at least they are in
other oddball sizes like 6 1/2 x 8 1/2).

*I've done stiched panoramas before, and they are fun. The main problem
is ensuring that the pivot point is centered on the nodal point of the
lens. Not too many view cameras have a mounting point below the lens. If
this isn't done, close objects in the scene will not stich together
well. If the camera has rear shift, this would be a better option,
assuming the lens can cover the new virtual format. **George Steward***

When I contemplated getting back into 4x10, I seriously considered this
method. As I already had a 4x5 camera with rear shifts and a number of
lenses that cover 4x10. The initial investment would be relatively small
(the cost of the stitching SW, and either a new desktop scanner - which
I'll probably get anyway - or the price of paying someone else to do the
scans). However, I happened to get a great deal on some slightly used
4x10 holders. I then assembled my own hybrid 4x10 camera from bits and
pieces I picked up from a number of sources. So, the method of using
rear shift and stitching got put on the back burner. George's reply
jogged my memory and got me thinking (always dangerous) about this
again.

Although I have a 4x10 camera and holders, there are times when I want
to go lighter (backpacking). My 4x10 camera and lenses are reasonably
light, but the weight and bulk of the holders can add up quickly
compared to 4x5 Quickloads or Readyloads. For that reason, I have
considered using rear shift to shoot two 4x5 images and stitch them
together to produce something close to a 4x10 image (maybe 4x9 with the
overlap between the two frames). This would allow me to carry an
ultralight camera, like the Toho, leave the 4x10 holders at home and use
Quick/Readyloads. This would be the ideal set-up for backpacking. I
could also use this same method with my ARCA-SWISS if I'm out in the
field and don't have any 4x10 holders with me (or run out of loaded
holders and don't have time to reload).

You need to use lenses capable of covering 4x10, but I have a number of
reasonably lightweight lenses with ample coverage. One possible issue I
see is asymmetric light fall-off when using wide angle lenses. If this
does show up, I assume it can be evened out in SW. Anybody have any
experience they can share?

Also, since there should be little distortion using this method
(compared to rotating the camera), I would think the amount of overlap
between the two frames would be small. In general, I prefer working with
a camera in my intended format. I prefer composing the entire image on
the ground glass and exposing it on a single sheet of film. There are
certainly advantages to this method. However, for times when it's
impractical or impossible, using rear shift and stitching two images
together seems to be a viable alternative. As my interest in 4x10 has
been rekindled, I'll probably give it a try in the next couple months
and see how well it works. In the mean time, if anybody else has tried
it, please share what you've learned.

### Holder standards

I highly recommend you consider the holders first. IMHO, in
non-mainstream formats, the availability of affordable (or at least
attainable) holders is of paramount importance. For me, while choosing a
camera may be more exciting, getting the holders is far more important.
I learned that the hard way the first time I tried 4x10. The second time
around, I bought the holders first, before I even started looking for a
camera. The most beautiful camera in the world is useless without
holders for your film.

BTW, in 4x10, there are TWO different "standard" sizes for the holders.
The Wisner 4x10 cameras use holders based on the older 4x10 X-Ray
holders (made by Lisco, Fidelity and Kodak more than 30 years ago). It
can be REAL hard to find holders in this size. The most common are the
Mido II holders (that are not the best holders ever made) that were sold
for the Wisner cameras about 10 years ago. While the concept is good,
the quality of construction wasn't the best and light leaks can be a big
problem (I speak from experience). The Mido holders were discontinued
several years ago after the death of their maker. Ron Wisner does have
4x10 wooden holders listed on his website, but I haven't seen any in
person, nor have I talked to anybody who has. So, I can't comment on the
quality or availability.

All the other commercially available 4x10 cameras (Canham, Lotus and
Altview) use holders that are wider than the Wisner X-Ray style holders.
Holders in this size are readily available from Keith Canham (as
mentioned above \~\$95 each and very well made) and
[Lotus](http://www.lotusviewcamera.at/accessories/sheetfilmholder_e.html)
(wooden, beautiful, well-made and expensive), [AWB Alan
Brubaker](http://www.filmholders.com) (check out Alan's web site for
some nice photos of his holders in various sizes) and S&S (Sandy King
and Sam Wang) will custom make wooden holders in a variety of formats.
Such custom made holders are justifiably expensive (the labor involved
in making 4x10 or 5x12 holders is the nearly the same as making 11x14 or
12x20 holders). I was fortunate to purchase several used Lotus 4x10
holders at a very reasonable price. If I was looking to buy new holders
today, I'd buy the Canham holders as they are readily available and
represent the best value.

### More on options available to Wisner camera owners

4x10 Fidelity/Kodak/Lisco X-Ray Holders - Evidently these were popular
at one time in the ancient past for x-raying animal paws and infant
limbs. The medical/veterinary industry switched to a different style
x-ray cassette decades ago. I spent YEARS trying to track some of these
down, calling all my local vets, x-ray supply houses, manufacturers,
begging another photographer to sell me his, etc. Finally, someone at
Fidelity searched through some old catalogs and said they'd discontinued
their 4x10 x-ray holders over 30 years ago. In over 14 years of looking,
I've only seen three of these for sale (4x10 Lisco X-Ray Holders).
Unfortunately, this was the standard Ron Wisner chose to use when he
introduced his 4x10 camera. As you are aware, this makes the Wisner 4x10
cameras uniquely incompatible with the Canham style holders that
everybody else uses.

4x10 Mido II Holders and Clamshell - When I bought my 4x10 Wisner
Technical Field in early 1992, these were the holders Wisner was selling
with the camera. I bought the camera, five holders and a clamshell. The
holders leaked light like a sieve. I was losing more shots to light
leaks than not. I sent the holders back to Mido multiple times to be
reworked/repaired/replaced. Each time they came back, there were
incremental improvements in the failure rate - but it was still too high
to be acceptable. Mr. Mido seemed determined to make the holders work.
His concept was a good one, but quality and consistency of the
construction of the holders was lacking. In August 1996, I gave up and
sold my entire 4x10 outfit (4x5/4x10 Wisner Tech Field, Mido holders and
several lenses). The Mido II holders do occasionally show up on the used
market. They may have improved the quality after I sold mine, or with
some patience and skill, it may be possible to rework the holders and/or
clamshell to improve the success rate. Unfortunately, I learned a year
or two after selling my camera that Mr. Mido had become ill and
eventually passed away.

Oddly, B&H still lists 4x10 Mido holders and clamshells on their web
site. They are listed as a special order item. I wonder if that means
there are some new, old stock 4x10 Mido holders still in existence
somewhere, or if they have just neglected to update their web site in
the last six or seven years. They list the clamshell (focus spacer) with
one holder at \$159.95 and additional holders at \$79.95. I've been
curious what would happen if someone attempted to order some 4x10 Mido
holders from B&H (but not curious enough to try placing an order as I no
longer have the Wisner 4x10 camera).

4x10 Lotus Holders (Wisner Form Factor or Canham form factor) - I sold
my 4x10 Wisner outfit to a gentleman from Austria named Burkhardt
Kiegeland. He immediately shared my frustration with the Mido II
holders. Mr Kiegeland had the resources and commitment to do something
about it. He had a craftsman make some 4x10 holders to fit the Wisner
camera and formed a new company, Lotus View Camera to manufacture and
sell these holders. Lotus immediately became a supplier of holders to
Wisner. In November, 1996 I saw one of these Lotus 4x10 holders at a
Wisner dealer in Sacramento. The quality appeared to be quite good. and
at \$95 the price was competitive. Lotus also began manufacturing 4x10
holders in the Canham form factor, as well as other banquet and ULF
sizes. Soon thereafter, Lotus also introduced their own line of cameras
from 4x5 - 20x24. I'm not sure when the official Lotus/Wisner holder
relationship dissolved, but if you can find some of the Lotus holders in
the Wisner size, they should serve you well. Lotus will still custom
make 4x10 holders in the Wisner form factor, but the price is
considerably more than the original \$95 retail price. The dollar is
much weaker now than it was in the late 1990s, and this would now be
considered a special custom made item, not something normally in stock.

Wisner 4x10 Holders - I have not used any of the Wisner wooden holders,
but the ones I've seen did not look nearly as well made at the wooden
holders I've seen from S&S, Lotus or AWB (Alan Brubaker). Of course,
thay also cost a LOT less. The Wisner holders have the advantage of
being, by far, the least expensive of the wooden 4x10 holders. If Emile
can get them for you without delay at \$95 each, it may be worth a try.
As I haven't used them, I can't specifically recommend them one way or
the other. Perhaps somebody who has used Wisner holders could chime in
with their experience.

Custom Made Holders - As I mentioned above, Lotus will still custom make
4x10 holders in the Wisner form factor. As they were once an official
supplier to Wisner, you are assured the holders will fit your camera
properly. I haven't used any 4x10 Lotus holders in the Wisner size, but
I am fortunate to have fifteen of their holders in the Canham form
factor and can attest that they are light tight, beautifully made, and
smooth to operate. Others have mentioned the S&S holders supplied by
Sandy King and Sam Wang. I have seen these holders in person, but not
used them. They appear to be of excellent quality, and other
photographers I know who've used them are very satisfied. The nice thing
about S&S is they seem very willing to make custom made holders in any
size you desire at a reasonble (for custom made holders) price. I have
also not used the AWB holders, but they also come highly recommended.

If you do get custom made holders, I'd recommend getting them made in
the Canham form factor and getting your camera modified to match. The
Canham standard is the more common of the two. In addition to the Canham
4x10 camera, cameras in this format from Lotus and Patrick Alt also use
the Canham style holders. Holders in this size are more readily
available, both new and used. The cost of getting your Wisner camera
back modified will be, IMHO money well spent. The REAL key to shooting a
non-mainstream format, like 4x10, is the availability and cost of
holders. Getting your Wisner modified to accept Canham style holders
will increase your options.

4x10 Canham Holders - This is probably the most practical option. Canham
holders are made from parts he gets from Fidelity. They look and feel
just like regular Fidelity holders. At \$95 each, they cost considerably
more than standard, off-the-shelf 8x10 Fidelity holders, but in the
oddball world that is 4x10, they are a relative bargain. I have never
heard of any problems with light leaks from anybody using 4x10 Canham
holders. If you're looking for the lowest cost, least hassle option,
this would be the way to go. Some people may prefer the elegant look and
feel of fine wooden holders over the plastic and aluminum of the Canham
holders. I can't say I blame them - like a fine wooden camera, fine
wooden holders are pleasing to the eye and to the touch. However, if
you're just looking for holders that are reliable, attainable, durable
and affordable, it's tough to beat the Canhams. I have no idea what it
would cost today, but 8 years ago before I sold my 4x10 Wisner, Keith
Canham quoted me a price of \$100 to modify my Wisner camera to accept
his holders. Even if the price has tripled in the last 8 years, I still
think it would be worth it in the long run.

I'm now on my second go around with 4x10. My first attempt ended in
frustration over the lack of quality holders to fit my camera. I got
tired of sending my holders back to Mido for "tune-up", wating a few
weeks for them to come back and still losing a large percentage of my
best shots to light leaks. It just wasn't worth it. In hindsight, I
should have taken Keith Canham up on his offer to modify my camera,
bought five or ten of his holders and gone happily about my business.
Rather than face the same frustration, this time around, I bought the
holders FIRST, before I even started looking for a 4x10 camera. I told
myself I didn't care what camera they fit, I was going to snap up the
first quality 4x10 holders I found at a reasonable price, and then buy a
camera to match. This strategy worked much better. I was fortunate to
find fifteen 4x10 Lotus holders at an extremely agreeable price. I
snapped them up, and haven't looked back. They happened to be the Canham
form factor - all the better. If I need additional holders to fit my
camera at some time in the future, I know I can get them from Canham at
a reasonable price.

When I owned my 4x10 Wisner Tech Field, I never had a single complaint
about the quality or usability of the camera. It was actually a
beautiful camera that was a joy to use (except for the Mido holders). It
is also the most affordable of the full-featured 4x10 cameras - by a
fair margin. Don't let the holder situation scare you off. Bite the
bullet and get some good holders (even if it means modifying the back of
your camera). You'll be glad you did. Welcome to the 4x10 format.

### More info and comments

This article was put together by QTL using Kerry Thalmann's replies in
the following Q&A threads with minor editing:

-   [Fishing for long and skinny](/lfforum/topic/498501.html)
-   [4x10 format questions](/lfforum/topic/189903.html)
-   [Poor Man's 4x10](/lfforum/topic/498002.html)
-   [Need 4x10 film holders for Wisner TF](/lfforum/topic/498926.html)

