Filters for Large Format Photography
------------------------------------

**By [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for the [Large
Format Page](.)**

*Summary: a market survey and collection of tips on filters from the
perspective of the large format photographer, including rear mounted
filters, center filters, polarizers, and rectangular filter systems.*

### Attaching filters at the rear of the lens

With LF, you have the option to attach filters at the rear of the lens.
This works for color correction filters which don't need to be adjusted.
The advantage is that a filter inside the camera is less likely to get
dust, dirt, smudges, fingerprints, and will cause less flare.

There are two precautions to take:

-   You have to be super careful to keep your filter clean. Any dust,
    dirt, smudges, fingerprints, as well as defects, will have more of a
    detrimental effect on the quality of the image as the light passing
    through the imperfections has already passed through the lens.
-   A filter mounted behind the lens creates a focus shift equal to
    1/3rd the thickness of the filter so all focusing must be done with
    the filter in place, except for gels, whose thickness is
    neglectible.

### Center filter

#### Principles

For most lenses, the illumination will go as cos\^4 theta where theta is
the angle between the center of the lens and the image point on the
film. This is called *Light fall-off*. It's basically the result of the
law of optics. For wide-angle lenses, this can result in the corners
being two or three stops darker than the center.

Two powers come from the light traveling a greater distance and the
inverse square law, one power comes from the exit pupil of the lens
being tilted and looking like an ellipse rather than the full circe,
another power comes from the rays striking the film at an angle \[the
same reason for winter: the sun's rays strike the earth at an increased
angle\]. The best aperture re light fall-off is any aperture more than
about 2 stops (maybe 3) down from wide open. Further stopping down
should not change the relative illumination, center to corners. This is
well explained in the book Applied Photographic Optics by Sidney F. Ray,
published by the Focal Press. Excellent but rather expensive. It is a
big book, more than 500 pages. **Michael Briggs**

This is different from vignetting, caused by mechanical obstruction. At
wide apertures, lenses will vignete because the glass elements aren't
big enough (if they were made larger, the lens would be more expensive
and heavier).

Most wideangle lenses from SLR cameras are retrofocus (retro-telephoto)
designs, meaning that the nodal point is somewhere towards the front of
the lens, in some cases in front of the lens. This is necessary so that
the lens does not protrude into the mirror box area. Retrofocus designs
decrease fall-off, which is why those lenses don't require a center
filter. On the other hand, Mamiya suggests a center filter for their
43mm M7 lens, which has the distinction of being symmetrical thanks to
the RF camera. I don't know of a retrofocus lens for LF. Retrofocus
designs are asymmetric and require floating elements for good
performance at close range.

The center filter is a simple solution to the light fall-off problem. It
is darker in the center and gradually brighter at the edges. Center
filters always are mounted in front. They must be screwed directly into
the lens without using a step up ring, so you need one per filter size
of lens. This is because center filters are designed to be used a
certain distance from the lens. You need to remember that it can not be
seen by the film until the lens has been stopped down at least 2 stops.

#### Do I need one ?

The wider the lens, the more of the full coverage of the lens you use
(ie using 5x7 with a 110mm vs using 4x5, or using 8x10 with the 150mm vs
using 4x5 with a plasmat 150/5.6 ), or the more movements you make, the
worse the effect. Most people find that light fall-off is neglectible
unless you start using a 90mm on 4x5. Even though, few shooters would
use a CF at 90mm on 4x5. On the other hand, most find it necessary at
90mm on 5x7 or at 58mm on 4x5.

Whether you feel the need for correction is an esthetic decision. Some
people actually like the fall-off. It's less noticeable for dark scenes
than for bright scenes. It's less noticeable if your scene has dark
areas in the corners (like trees). For landscapes, it is most noticable
in skys and tends to pull the eye toward the center. It seems to be more
bothersome in interiors, particularly white walls.

For the more even image, you pay quite a price. Not only these filters
tend to be expensive, they eat at least two f-stops and add complexity
to calculating exposures. Since they are mounted directly on the lens,
and have larger front elements (for example a 67 center filter has an
outer threading of 86mm) they can make difficult to use of other filters
without vignetting. You could correct for the fall off in the darkroom.

#### Which density and brand to use ?

The filters are not matched to a particular lens, so at least you can
interchange them between two lenses if they have the same filter size.
The difference between having a CF and not having one is quite relative
(some photographers are happy without, while some think that they are
necessary), thus you'd guess the difference between two different brands
is extremely subtle. Center filters are made by B+W/Schneider, Heliopan,
Rodenstock, Hoya and Fuji. Prices can vary considerably depending where
you buy them.

" We stock some of the denser Heliopan CF and have sold virtually none.
You would lose so much light (3 stops) + you must stop a lens down at
least 2 stops for the filter to work that the denser version is not too
useable for most people. Virtually every CF sold is either .40
(Rodenstock) or .45 (Heliopan and others). I don't think you will find
many people, if any, who have actually used all 3 \[B+W/Schneider,
Heliopan, Rodenstocks\] on the same lens with the same film at the same
time \[and can compare them\]. We are in a unique position. We are the
Heliopan and the Rodenstock importer and also the Linhof importer. As
such we import the Heliopan and Rodenstock ceter filters as well as
Schneider ones for the 58 through 90mm XL lenses we sell. An extremely
knowlgeable photographer named Lief Erickson (tragically died too early)
too had this question. So he took the Linhof Technorama 617 and the old
Fuji 617 with a Schneider, Rodenstock and heliopan center filter for a
test. He found no difference on film between them. However that was
before Rodenstock redesigned their center filters. No center filter is
totally neutral. They tend to shift torwards green under cetain
conditions. The latest version of the Rodenstock ones are the most
neutral of all center filters. " **Bob Salomon**

### Polarizer

The main point of using a circular polarizer instead of a linear
polarizer is to ensure that autofocus and TTL metering would work
properly with your reflex camera (although this might not always be
necessary). If you intend to use your polarizer also on a reflex camera,
it's probably safer to get the circular variety. Since a LF camera has
no mirror, you can use either a linear or a circular polarizer on your
LF camera. Linear polarizers are cheaper, and some people think they are
better at removing reflections than circular polarizers.

A Kaeseman polarizer is sealed, and therefore more durable (the foil on
other polarizers tends to degrade over time). It is also said they are
better at removing reflections.

To avoid vignetting, you can use a slim polarizer (no threads for a
clip-on lens cap or an additional filter), or a wide-angle polarizer
which has a larger front element.

Many polarizers tend to have a cold color bias. It's generally better to
have a warm color bias than a cold color bias, hence the interest of the
warm tone polarizers. In a C&D article, Englander compared ten linear
and circular polarizers. His densitometer readings are
(total,red,green,blue):

     Wratten  (.6,.62,.62,.62)
     B+W Warm  (.56,.57,.57,.58)
     B+W circular  (.51,.55,.52,.48)
     Heliopan circular  (.58,.64,.58,.53)
     Heliopan linear  (.62,.69,.63,.57) 
     Heliopan Warm  (.60,.60,.61,.56)
     Tiffen linear  (.50,.52,.49,.50)
     Tiffen circular  (.51,.50,.52,.47)
     Hoya circular  (.54,.56,.55,.53)
     Hoya linear  (.45,.47,.45,.43).
     Tiffen Warm  (.62,.58,.62,.62)

He concluded that the most neutral filter was the B+W Warm. The Tiffen
Warm is linear. Hoya has subsequently introduced a Warm polarizer
(called the Moose filter, after the so-named wildlife photographer) in
circular version, which is relatively economical.

Englender also found the Wratten .6ND filter to match the density of the
polarizers well. This confirms the rule to use a filter factor of two
stops for a polarizer.

### UV filter

Some folks like to use them permanently for protection of the front
element of the lens, just like in 35mm. Image degradation would be
neglectible, especially considering the enlargement ratios needed in LF.
Others find that in LF, accidental damage is unlikely. They are
definitively useful at high altitudes to remove excess UV.

### Step up rings

You can buy circular filters (glass) to fit your largest lens, and then
a set of step-up rings to fit your other lenses. The main problem with
this approach is that step-up rings put the filter further from the
lens, which might actually increase vignetting on wide-angle lenses. For
instance, I find I get more vignetting on my 110 with a step-up ring
from 67 to 82 than with a plain 67 filter. Filter systems (see next)
work on the same principle (one set of filters, one ring for each lens),
but are more versatile. The only advantage of using step-up rings would
be that they are cheaper than the adaptor rings used in most filter
systems.

### Filter systems

Filter systems are by far the most versatile way to use filters for a
set of different lenses. You only need to get a different adaptor ring
for each lens. You have a huge choice of filters, can adjust them
independently in rotation and translation (making this kind of system
almost mandatory if you use graduated filters) and combine them easily.
Some systems also include a lens shade. Their main drawbacks are the
bulk and set-up time required for the system. Both factors are not a
significant aggravation in LF, hence their popularity with LF users.

A filter system has three components:

-   A circular ring, one for each lens size. The best systems have two
    types of adaptor rings, regular rings, and wide-angle rings, which
    keep the holder closer to the lens to avoid vignetting.
-   A holder. The best systems have a choice of holders to accomodate a
    various number and/or thickness of filters .
-   A choice of rectangular filters. The rectangular shape allows the
    filter to be adjusted in height (critical for graduated filters),
    while the holder can be rotated. Various materials are available:
    -   Gels are the cheapest. Optically good, but not durable. The
        Kodak Wratten filters are manufactured to very precise specs,
        and their spectral response is published.
    -   Glass could be optically the best, but are easy to break.
        Tiffen, Heliopan, and Schneider make glass filters. Schneider
        has MC glass filters (a 4x5 grad is over \$400).
    -   Polyester filters are made only by Lee (Calumet sells Lee
        products under their own name). One thing to be careful with
        them if you wish to combine them with the polarizer is that they
        must be between the polarizer and the film. If you place them in
        front of the polarizer, you'll see some interesting patterns.
    -   Optical resin (CR-39) is the most common, and will be discussed
        further.

There are three widths of holders that are usable with LF:

-   83mm or 3"1/4(Cokin P)
-   100mm or 4" (Hitech, Lee/Calumet, Sinar)
-   130mm or 5" (Cokin X-Pro)

#### Cokin

-   **Cokin A (3" or 75mm)**. Rings 36-62mm. Just too small for most
    serious photographers.
-   **Cokin P (83mm)**. The most common system. Rings 48-82mm. It is by
    far the cheapest (holder and rings around \$10 each), so durability
    of the holder is not a real concern. It will work for many lenses,
    especially if you don't stack filters and saw off the outermost
    filter slot to reduce the possibility of vignetting. With this
    modification, it works with Nikon 20/2.8, 24-120, Canon 17-35 above
    24, 110 XL in 5x7 without extreme movements. One nice thing the
    Cokin system has is the ability to accept a glass polarizer that can
    be rotated independently of the holder. This is important when
    combining a polarizer and an ND grad. However, this polarizer will
    vignette more than the holder. The main drawback of this holder is
    that it is too small for some lenses. Cokin P filters are cheap and
    low quality. In particular, the graduated grey is not neutral and
    has a green cast. However, Hi-Tech and Singh-Ray make filters that
    fit the Cokin P holder, so this is not an issue. A Hi-Tech grad to
    fit the Cokin P is truly neutral, and costs only \$30. Hi-Tech also
    makes their holder in P size, but if you're going to pay more than
    \$100 for a holder, you might as well get it in 100mm.
-   **Cokin X-pro (130mm).** The largest holder. It will fit a lens with
    max. 122 mm external diameter. Nobody else makes filters that large.
    This system is relatively new.

#### The 100mm (4 inch) standard: Hitech, Lee/Calumet, Sinar

The filters are extremely similar in optical quality, the only real
difference being the holder system and the thickness of the filter. The
quality is very high. They might be actually made at the same plant.
Hi-Tech has the best selection and the best prices (notably cheaper than
Lee) for filters. The holders are well built, however they are heavier,
bulkier, and considerably more expensive than the Cokin. The advantage
is having larger filters, and a more configurable holder.

-   **Lee (100mm)**. The most versatile holder system as far as filter
    thickness is concerned. It can use any 100mm filter. You configure
    your holder with a variety of slots systems of different widths,
    including gel, 2mm,4mm. The holder is \$100, regular rings \$40
    (larger sizes are more expensive, up to 105mm), wide-angle rings
    \$62 (mount the filter closer to the lens, available only up to
    82mm). Polarizer is a square (\$150). To rotate it independently,
    you need to tandem two holders, which might vignette wide-angle
    lenses.
-   **Hi-Tech (100mm)**. Offers more lens attachments (in particular
    attachments to the back of the lens) than Lee. The filter thickness
    is 1.5mm. The Hitech may not handle all Lee filters. The holder is
    \$120, regular rings \$25 , and wide angle rings \$45, so it comes a
    bit cheaper than the Lee. Standard polarizer is a expensive circular
    105mm which fits on a front ring, which might cause vignetting.
-   **Sinar (100mm)** Filters are either 1mm or 1.25 mm thick. The
    selection is limited and nobody else makes filter that thin. You
    could have the edges of other manufacturer's filters milled to fit
    the holder, but I don't really see why one wouldn't prefer to use
    Lee or Hi-Tech in the first place. Sinar has discontinued this
    product line.

#### Other manufacturers

Singh Ray produces high quality and expensive resin filters to fit other
manufacturer's holders. Their hard-step GND has a sharper transition
than other manufacturer's equivalent. They also offer a few specialty
filters, like a reverse GND and a strip, and will consider making custom
filters. Not all their filters are listed on their web site. Their
filters fit both the Cokin P system (grad: \$100, Pol: \$160), and the
100mm system (grad: \$150, Pol:\$340). Their polarizer for the 100mm
system is a 100mm x 100mm square (like the Lee).

### Wide angle lenses

Using additional filters on wide angle lenses present some unique
problems, because of the wide angle of coverage, large front element,
and necessity (for some) to have a center filter. [SK Grimes
adapter](http://www.skgrimes.com/slipon/index.htm) can help and is much
cheaper than custom adaptors made by Lee. Larry Huppert is developing a
[custom system based on 100mm
filters](http://www.greenspun.com/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg.tcl?msg_id=003cHE).

### More information

Rodenstock has a 2-page brochure about the use of center filters. In the
US, you can request it from info@hpmarketingcorp.com

-   [The Filter Connection](http://www.2filter.com/)
-   [Singh-Ray](http://www.singh-ray.com/)
-   [Lee filters](http://www.leefilters.com/)

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/filters.html)
