Large format photography: enhanced focussing screens

Enhanced focussing screens
--------------------------

**Compiled by [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for
[largeformatphotography.info](.)**

\
*If you find it difficult to focus with your ground glass, you might
want to consider a replacement. Two things can make a ground glass
difficult to focus on:*

-   Grain
-   Darkness off axis, especially off-axis

In addition, the hot spot makes it difficult to assess the composition.
A finer glass will tend to have a worse light fall-off. Two solutions
are to add a Fresnel lens to even up the illumination, or to use a Boss
screen. Although they do their job, the problem with Fresnel lenses is
that they work optimally only for one focal length. On the other hand,
ALL the users of the Boss screen seem to like it. The only drawback seem
to be that this screen might be damaged by extreme temperatures (hot and
cold). I was relatively satisfied with the screen on the 5x7 back of my
tachi, which was a plastic fresnel/ground combination protected by a
sheet of glass. I found the stock screen of my Canham difficult to focus
on. I tried using a fresnel lens, but I got weird problems with it. Then
I switched to a Toyo focussing screen, which has a considerably finer
grain. This made focussing easier but the hot spot was terrible.
Eventually I switched to a Boss screen, and I found it worked fine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Fresnel lenses

Some general remarks about focusing screens. Most of these are "field
lenses" usually of the Fresnel type, so they can be flat, which direct
the light going through the ground glass toward the expected location of
the viewer's eyes. For this scheme to work right the focal length of the
field lens must be such as to focus the light from the lens at a
convenient distance for viewing. This will be affected by the location
of the lens so will vary with focal length of the taking lens and to a
lesser extent with distance focused on. It is the angle of the cone of
light leaving the lens which is important. It also depends on the whole
optical path being centered. For this reason field lenses do not work
well when the camera movements are used. The parts of the screen away
from the optical center will be darker than with a conventional GG. The
same for using WA lenses. The angle of the light striking the edges of
GG are acute and a different FL of field lens is needed to make the
image uniform. **Richard Knoppow**

I tried a fresnel lens made by Arca-Swiss. The illumination is a bit
more even than before, but I don't find the image to be much brighter.
The thing which bugs me is that when I use wide angles, there is a very
weird effect, with concentric bright rings which look like double
images. They are extremely disturbing with a 90 lens, and noticeable
with a 120 lens, to the point of preventing me from assessing the
composition of the image in the corners. Rod Klukas from Photomark says
that with any Fresnel this is going to happen for some focal lenghts (he
observes the same with this 45 lens on 4x5), and as a consequence there
is a folk he knows who has different backs with different fresnels that
he switches as he switches lenses. **Tuan**

### The Beattie Intenscreen

The Beattie is, basically, a plastic "ground-glass" with a built-in
fresnel lens on one side of the "ground-glass". get a glass cover plate
to protect the plastic screen. I decided that I didn't like the Beattie
and took it off and went back to using a plain ground glass and fresnel
lens. Why? It really is brighter but:

-   The grain is much coarser than other ground glasses that I"ve used
    so that while the scene is easier to see because it's brighter, it's
    harder to focus because of the coarse grain of the GG being more
    visible. For me the net effect was no change in ease of focusing.
-   The GG becomes strongly directional. Moving your eye away from the
    axis of the lens causs the image to go very dark. So as soon as you
    use any significant amount of rise/fall or shift, the image "blacks
    out". Not a problem for those who don't use much movement, and less
    a problem with long lenses, but I found it to be nearly impossible
    to focus when using a 90mm or shorter lens along with any amount of
    vertical/horizontal movement.

One person even said that the plastic screens aren't always perfectly
flat so that prefect focus in the center of the screen may give out of
focus negatives. The probably do make pretty good backup ground glass
for carrying around. I would imagine they are much less fragle than real
glass, and backups are rarely needed. **Barry Sherman**

### The Linhof Super Screen

The Linhof Super Screen also incorporates a fresnel, but it didn't
interfere with focusing in the same way as a Beattie Intenscreen. I
think the Linhof was brighter than the Boss, but I did not care for the
way it had bowed in the Technika it was installed in. To make matters
worse, I looked at it one day, noted the bowing, then went back about a
week later, and it was bowed differently. I didn't particularly care for
the idea that the damn thing was not stable (it's a plastic screen).
**Paul Butzi**

### The Boss screen

The "Boss" screen, made in the Netherlands, is a thin layer of a light
scattering wax/paraffin mixture between two glass layers. In contrast to
a "ground" glass there is no visible grain, it is brighter and quite
contrasty. In addition you dont need an extra fresnel lens for most
focal length. I use one on my 4x5 with lenses from 75mm to 600mm and I
am very pleased with it. With the 75mm there is a hot spot in the
center, but the corners of the format are still clearly visible without
fresnel. They have screens fitting most view cameras and you can also
choose between a model with clear corners (similar to cut-away corners)
and the standard rectangular shape. If I remember it right, the
manufacturer advises that temperatures should not exceed 55 degrees C,
but I never had any problems in summer. I noticed, however, that at
temperatures below approximately -10 degrees C, some Newtons rings
appeared after some hours in the cold at the edge of the ground glass,
indicating a slight separation between the glass and the wax layer. This
effect was reversible, though. I experienced a partial separation
(1-2square cm) between the wax and (one of the) glass layers when the
camera was subjected to temperatures below -15degrees C (5 deg. F) for
several hours. It shows up as an area with Newton's rings, its not a
crack pattern. You can easily test if its really separated, by applying
a little bit of pressure with your fingers on the glass: when the Newton
rings move, you have a separation ( and not some ice from breathing on
your glass :-) ). Most of the time this was reversible and the rings
disapperared when the camera was warmed up again, but one time (really
cold) it was permanent. As you have mentioned, it is possible to
"repair" this area by \_careful\_ heating with a hair dryer \_just\_
until the wax melts and becomes clear, then let it cool again. Dont
forget to tape the edges of the inner glas, or else some wax will creep
out (I forgot). The repaired area looks a little more translucent when
the GG is held against the light, but in the camera it is only
noticeable at certain angles. I assume this difference can be reduced by
changing the cool-down process of the wax, but I did not want to make a
test series with my Bosscreen. Be aware that according to the
manufacturer separation can also happen if the screen is bent by
tightening the mounting (screws or whatever device is used) of the
ground glass too much. Despite the cold temperature problems I would
still recommend the Bosscreen; its a real improvement over my former
setup (Linhof ground glass and Fresnel). **Arne Croell.**

*Bosscreen is made by a Dutch company called Stabitech (formerly
"Stabilix", which went bankrupt towards the end of 2003). The company
sells direct as well. The new website of the company is
http://www.stabitech.nl You can place an order by email with them and
wire your payment to their bank account. They can cut a screen at any
size to fit your camera, but this took more than a month in my case.
It's imported in the US and probably sold retail as well by Bromwell
Marketing in Pittsburgh (412-321-4118). It was extremely difficult to
get a screen through the specialty LF retailers.*

I have heard that the temperature limit is around 140F, which is easily
reached in summer in a car trunk. Chris Newman writes "I am on my third
one, one damaged by extreme cold the other by moderate heat (90
degrees)". Myself, I didn't have any problems until a summer trip to the
Rocky Mountains, (where it doesn't get that hot). Since then, I have the
dreaded bubbles. They do not interfere so much that the screen would not
be usable, however are enough of a nuisance that I will replace it. One
frequent concern about the Boss screen is that the position of the plane
of focus would be wrong, but this has been addressed properly:

Basically, the sheets of glass of the Bosscreen are two different sizes.
The one which goes closest to the lens is small enough to fit INSIDE the
area on which the ground glass usually rests. It is the inner surface of
the piece of glass on the viewing side which actually seats on the
routed out area that the ground glass normally sits. This then puts the
inner surface of this outermost piece of glass in the correct focal
plane, which means, of course, that the wax is actually too close to the
lens at this point. To compensate for that, there is a piece of plastic
(they call it "tape") along the edges on the inner side of the glass
which sits in the rout. This tape is sufficient to correctly space the
glass back far enough to put the wax in the correct focal plane. **David
Fokos**.

The layer of glass between the lens and image forming plane probably
affects the focus position. Probably why the real Boss screen comes with
some shims. Otherwise the smaller front glass should put the wax layer
in the same position as the ground side of the ground glass (assuming
you are using a camera designed to have no fresnel between the ground
glass and the lens, some cameras like most speed graphics were designed
to always have a fresnel mounted in front of the GG). I've heard that
the layer of glass moves the focus point back by about 1/3 the thickness
of the glass if I'm remembering right. I'm sure it depends on the index
of refraction of the glass, but this probably doesn't vary much unless
you are using some exotic glass type. **John Sparks**

### More information

[Viewing Screens for Large Format
Cameras](http://www.wisner.com/viewing.htm) by Ron Wisner. Explains how
a ground glass work.

List compiled by **Craig Blurton** (originally posted in a [LF Forum
thread](http://www.largeformatphotography.info/forum/showthread.php?t=18137)):

FOCUSING SCREENS MADE BY THIRD PARTY MANUFACTURERS\
\
Beattie Intenscreen\
[www.intenscreen.com](http://www.intenscreen.com)\
\
BosScreen\
[www.stabitech.nl/Bosscreen.htm](http://www.stabitech.nl/Bosscreen.htm)\
\
BrightScreen\
<http://www.brightscreen.com/view.html>\
\
Maxwell Precision Optics UNOFFICIAL website\
[www.mattclara.com/maxwell/index.html](http://www.mattclara.com/maxwell/index.html)\
\
Maxwell Precision Optics\
Contact Bill Maxwell &lt;maxwellprecisionoptics@yahoo.com&gt;\
\
Satin Snow\
[www.satinsnowglass.com](http://www.satinsnowglass.com)\
\
Velveteen View screen\
Contact Greg Garret &lt;garretart7@yahoo.com&gt;\
\
EXAMPLES OF FOCUSING SCREENS MADE/SOLD BY MANUFACTURERS FOR THEIR
CAMERA\
\
Ebony Fresnel Lenses\
<http://www.ebonycamera.com/acc.html>\
\
Canham Fresnel Lenses\
<http://www.canhamcameras.com/accessoryf.html>\
\
Linhof Super Screen\
[www.linhof.de](http://www.linhof.de)\
\
Sinar Fresnel Lenses\
<http://www.sinar.ch>\
\
Wisner Fresnel Lenses\
<http://wisner.com/Page19.html>\
\
Wista Fresnel Lenses\
<http://www.wista.co.jp>\
\
EXAMPLES OF GENERIC FRESNEL LENS THAT CAN BE ADAPTED FOR USE AS A
FOCUSING SCREEN WITH A CAMERA\
\
3DLens.Com\
<http://www.3dlens.com>\
\
Edmund Optics\
<http://www.edmundoptics.com>\
\

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/gg.html)


