Tripod heads for Large Format Photography
-----------------------------------------

**By [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for the [Large
Format Page](.)**

*A survey of pan-tilt heads, ball heads, and quick release (QR) systems,
with a discussion of the merits of each system, and a few specific
recommendations based on user's experience. Updated Oct. 2008.*

![](/images/ball-heads.jpg)

**Ball heads, from left to right: Arca-Swiss B1, Acratech Ultimate
Ball-head, Slik Standard, Velbon PH-253**

### Three way Pan Tilt heads

A three way Pan Tilt head gives independant control of movement over
each of the three axes (pan, forward-backwards, left-right), using an
independant locking mechanism. It gives you precise control. Most users
find that they would be the most appropriate type of heads for
large-format use. While universally used in the studio, in the field,
they suffer from two drawbacks: (a) they are quite heavy and bulky (b)
they tend to be slow if you also use them for a smaller format camera.

-   The **Bogen 3029** (less than 2lbs/900g) is one of the smallest PT
    heads sturdy enough for a light LF. It has no QR. The **Bogen 3030**
    is identical except for a QR system which uses a very small
    rectangular plate, which might not be enough for most LF cameras.
-   The **Bogen Compact Gear Head 410/3275** (2.75lbs/1.24kg) has geared
    movements in 3 directions, making it easy to make minor adjustments.
    A disengagement clutch mechanism allows for quick positioning.
    Unlike most PT heads, it has no big protruding handles. Although
    advertised as a small and medium format head it is functionally one
    of the best PT heads for a 4x5. However, so people have reported
    some creep and wiggle. The QR system is incompatible with the Hex
    system, but has been reported to work fine: "The quick release is
    one of the desirable things about this head. It takes two motions to
    release this plate, one is to push in a button and the other is to
    move the lever the button is on in the opposite direction. I haven't
    been able to figure out how you could accidently release the plate
    and I have tried, the quick releases on most Bogens is a real weak
    point in my opinion but this is a big improvement. Also, to place
    the camera on the head everything goes into place with a definite
    release noise from the lever or else it doesn't go together at all.
    I have also put it through its paces with a 20+ pound monorail to
    check to see if there would be any movement or drift from the gears
    and found none. I could imagine smacking the head against a rock and
    breaking it in 2 or 3 pieces but otherwise mine has performed very
    well for me." **Jeff White**.
-   **The Bogen Deluxe 3047** has bubble levels and the hexagonal plate
    QR system, and is sturdy enough for most cameras. It's pretty cheap
    (\$60). The **Bogen Heavy Duty head 3057** and the **Bogen Super Pro
    Head 3039** are better made heads which will easily support a 8x10
    (\$120). Rated to 20lbs+. All are bulky with those handles sticking
    out, and heavy 4.2lbs/2kg. "I've used the 3057 head on a standard
    Zone VI tripod legset with 8x10 for years. It is a seriously heavy
    and solid combination. If you intend to go very far on foot to make
    your image it's likely not the best combination. On the plus side:
    it handles very heavy LF cameras with ease, the large mounting plate
    for the 3057 (which can also be used with other hexagonal head QR
    Bogen units) provides excellent support for heavy 8x10 and larger
    field type cameras with a large wood (or metal) beds, the quick
    release system makes mounting and dismounting large and heavy
    cameras very easy, its locking device is quite secure, and the
    adjustable two-way bubble levels make camera levelling simple if
    your camera does not have these devices attached. On the negative
    side: the side-to-side movement locking mechanism is a large, metal
    wheel-type device that is not very deeply ribbed and requires a lot
    hand strength to tighten and loosen, the fore-and-aft tilt movement
    has a rather short rubber-coated locking handle that tightens and
    loosens much more easily, but neither of the two mechanisms afford
    much in the way of leverage to smoothly or accurately position the
    camera. And, of course, it's heavy as hell, though it looks like you
    could take a sledge hammer to it with no adverse effects." **Sergio
    Ortega**
-   The **Arca B2**, a double axis ballhead, in spite of its name and
    appearance, is a PT head with independent control of the different
    axes. It unique in that the pivot points are directly centered under
    the center of the camera. " It is a double tilt rational head. It
    consists of one "ball" (for lateral tilts)inside another larger
    "ball" which controls fore and aft tilts. The Arca Swiss B1 Monoball
    has a variable tension "drag' controlled by a thumbscrew which
    allows the user to set just how loose you want the head to get when
    loosened (the B2 Monoball also has this feature on the outer ball)
    and when using a view camera with this head it is possible to set
    just enough drag so that it is possible to more easily (than with a
    conventional ballhead) level the camera in all directions." **Ellis
    Vener**. It's much more compact than other PT heads, using knobs
    instead of handles, It weights about the same as the Bogens (3.5lbs)
    but has a considerably higher carrying capacity, being rated at an
    astounding 150lbs. It's also astoundingly expensive (\$650).
-   The **Arca Cube** uses an innovative design with double stacked
    goniometers. It is geared, lighter (300g less) and more compact than
    the Bogen 410. The operation is very smooth. The main problem is
    that it costs \$1300. There is a Korean company [Photo
    Clam](http://www.tripodballhead.com/), that offers a similar product
    for half of that price. Arca Swiss claims that said product
    infringes on their patent, while the Korea company denies it does.
-   Other heads worth looking at include the **Linhof 3-way leveling
    head** (compact without protruding handles, 2 lbs/900g, \$700, yes
    it's a Linhof), and the **Majestic gear head** (6lbs/2.7kg, supports
    35lbs, \$270 but can be bought used for cheap).

### Two-way pan-tilt head (leveling heads)

Those heads have independant control of movement over two axes
(forward-backwards, left-right), and are used to level the camera. They
have a large mounting surface, making them secure for large cameras. The
**Ries** is considered by many to be the best, but **Gitzo** also makes
a leveling head worth checking out.

### Panning ball heads

A panning ball head has two independant controls: one for the ball
itself, which you can move freely in any direction, and the other,
generally a smaller knob, for the panning base. A pan bed is a separate
rotational table, which permits free left-right movement even when the
ball is locked. Most medium-sized balls have some sort of
frictioncontrol, which let you adjust the resistance of the ball to
movement. This way, you don't have to hold firmly the camera while
making adjustments. A good ball head should maintain smooth motion, even
with a high friction. Inexpensive ball heads do not seem to be able to
do that.

Generally, with the ball head it is faster to frame your shot initally,
but more finicky when you want to refine the framing because trying to
tweak tilt without upsetting side-to-side level can be difficult,
particularly with heavier cameras. What you gain in speed, you loose in
precision. For smaller cameras (35mm and MF), the ball-head is generally
acknowledged to be the tool of choice

Ball heads are much more compact than PT head, having no protruding
handles, and generally lighter, making them a good choice for field
photography, where you'd level using bubble levels.

-   **Acratech Ultimate Ballhead** (420g, \$270) This ball-head uses an
    innovative design where the ball is locked by an open diagonal
    collar. There are two advantages of this design (a) the weight
    savings over a classical design with a cup and walls, (b) the ease
    of cleaning, especially since there is no grease or oil. The ball's
    lock can be very positive, given it an outstanding strength to
    weight ratio. I write "can", because for that to happen you have to
    tightened with excessive torque. With a large format camera, the
    head slipped all the time, and I got my fingers pinched quite a few
    times too. The other drawback of the design is that while with a
    classical design you can tilt in any direction by about 45%, with
    the Acratech, you cannot tilt or tilt only very little in one
    direction since the ball's stem would be blocked by the collar. You
    can use the panning base to change the orientation of the collar,
    but it is not as convenient, since a second knob has to be released
    and locked. Compared to the Arca, the tension control is not as
    useful, since there are no calibration marks for it. The Acratech
    comes with an Arca-style platform installed by default.
-   **Linhof Profi II** (550g, \$250). One of the smallest ball-head of
    classical design that you should consider for general use with LF. A
    well-proven, smooth ball-head. Mine served me well for 7 years.
    However, it is not made of corrosion-proof materials, and got
    severely rusted inside after a very wet month in Alaska. Marflex
    asked for repair the same price as a new unit bought in Europe. The
    standard platform can be unscrewed to adapt a QR system. **Giotto**
    makes a similar, but much cheaper ball head, but it doesn't seem to
    have the same track record.
-   **Really Right Stuff BH-40** (494g, \$295 without clamp, add
    \$15-\$95 depending on clamp chosen). Really Right Stuff uses a
    different clamping mechanism where compression is appied sideways
    instead of from the bottom. Compared to the classical design
    (examplified by the B1 and Profi II), the RRS has two main
    advantages: a larger and much more usable pan locking mechanism, and
    an independent knob for setting the minimum drag on the ball. The
    main drawback is that the locking is done by a lever rather than by
    a knob. The lever can get on your way in some configurations. RSS
    has thought about this problem, by providing the ability to
    reposition the lever with a spring-loaded mechanism, yet when the
    need to reposition the lever occurs in action, it can be a little
    frustrating. The only other problem is that the two knobs are quite
    close, and although they are shaped differently, could sometimes be
    confused.
-   **Arca B1** (750g, \$400). The standard by which all other
    ball-heads are judged. Under a load, it is significantly more smooth
    than the Profi. What makes this ball unique is a patented elliptical
    ball which gets stiffer further away from the centered position. The
    drawback is that in some circumstances, the ball can lock-up. " The
    small friction screw defines the stroke of a disk in the
    multifunction knob. If you do loosen the multifunction knob onto
    this "limiter" the disk puts a high pressure onto the friction
    screw. Therefore you cannot loosen it until you have tightened
    slightly the multifunction knob and released the pressure. Another
    common mistake is that although the ball is unlocked, the
    multifunction knob is turned counter-clockwise onto the stop. ( pay
    attention which direction is clock- respectively counter-clockwise.)
    If you force the multifunction knob onto this stop, you will need
    the same power to tighten the multifunction knob again (as when you
    turned counter clockwise) If you experience a "lock-up", simply
    tighten (clockwise ! ) the multifunction knob approximately 1/2 turn
    and loosen the small friction screw if possible. That's it. There is
    no need to always alter the friction screw when changing the
    camera/lens weight. Use the index ring on the multifunction knob.
    Arca-Swiss Monoball tripod heads are serviced in the USA through our
    Office in Chicago: E-mail: arcaswiss@aol.com, Phone: (773) 248 2513,
    Fax: (773) 248 2774 " **Arca-Swiss Customer Support**. Recently
    (late 2000), there has been serious availability and quality control
    problems. The two competing products are the **Kirk BH-1** (900g,
    \$325), and the **RRS BH-55** (820g, \$370-\$450). Differences with
    the Arca are a separate knob for controling tension, a spherical
    head resulting in no progressive tension, but no lock-up too. Both
    are said to be very smooth and will support plenty (90lbs/40kg).
    Other ball heads with the same carrying capabilities are
    significantly heavier.
-   If you need even more support in a ball head, there are the
    scaled-up versions: **Linhof Profi III** and **Arca B1g**.

### Non-panning ball-heads

Only one knob to control the ball, and no panning base. The ball has to
be unlocked, or the tripod center column used, in order to perform
left-right adjustement. When using a small-format camera, the head's
vertical "drop notch" cannot be easily relocated. I don't particularly
recomment them, except for the smallest balls, since the weigth and
price savings are only around 25%.

-   **Velbon PH-253** (165g, \$60) Magnesium construction saves a bit of
    weight. Probably the the lightest ball-head one can use with LF.
    Adequate or lightweight LF cameras such as the Toho or the Tachihara
    when backpacking.
-   **Slik standard ball-head** (350g, \$45) Among the small ball-heads,
    this one has the largest ball, making it quite usable for LF. I used
    it extensively with my 5x7 on light trips and also as my main
    ball-head while waiting for a new B1. It is on-off only, although
    some friction can be obtained, which makes adjusting more delicate,
    but it locks solidly enough. The standard platform can be removed
    (destructively) to add a QR system.

### Quick Release systems

There are two universal QR systems, the Arca-Swiss system and the Bogen
Hex system. Despite of some commonly heard claims, having used both I
think they are equally good. While obviously AS heads come with the AS
system and Bogen heads come with the Bogen system, you can buy the clamp
independantly to retrofit several heads (unlike the old B1, the newer B1
can be easily converted to accept the Bogen). A variety of plates is
available for each system, although because of the "open channel" nature
of the AS system, there are much more offerings for it. Some Bogen heads
also come with a dedicated plate which is not compatible with the Hex
system, while the AS system has been embraced by several manufacturers.
The Bogen system is quite inexpensive, being a steel casting. The clamp
costs \$30, and each standard plate is \$15. The AS can become pretty
costly, with each plate starting at \$50, especially when you get custom
plates which are not interchangeable. This higher price reflects the
better fit and materials.

In the Arca-Swiss system, you line up and then slide the mounting plate
between two opposing jaws and then tighten them using a knob. The Bogen
system is spring-loaded: you position the plate, and press it in place,
which causes a lever to lock the plate. The basic Bogen plate is
hexagonal, however there is also a 4 inch square quick release plate,
which works with the clamp designed for the hexagonal system, and gives
more secure mounting with large cameras. The Bogen system, being
spring-loaded and aligned from the top, is clearly the faster.

The main advantage of the AS system is the availability of several
plates in all shapes and sizes to fit exactly your camera and collared
lenses. Kirk enterprises and Really Right Stuff make custom plates.
Being produced in a larger variety of models, RRS plates are generally
acknowldeged to have a better fit. If you use several cameras and
formats, that's a very nice thing. The Bogen plates are quite bulky and
tend to stick out on small cameras and lens mounts. On the other hand,
if you use only LF, the Bogen plates would work just fine. The second
advantage of the AS system is that the clamp is smaller (Kirk makes the
smallest) and lighter than the Bogen clamp. This is significant only if
travelling very light. A third advantage is that you can slide the plate
back and forth in the clamp to better balance your camera.

RRS claims that plates which have flat tops will twist on the camera
body. In practice, I have not found that to be a problem, provided you
tighten your plate with a screwdriver. For small cameras, plates with a
ridge for the Bogen system are actually available from Bogen and from
Kirk. There is nothing which would prevent someone from making plates
for the Bogen system with the same quality materials and fit as the RRS
plates.

It is not clear which system is the safer, since the failures modes are
quite different. In the AS system you must turn the knob to grip the
camera plate. Friction is holding your camera, so there is always the
danger of not tightening it enough. In the Bogen system, when you hear a
click, it is locked. However it could be easier to release the locking
lever by accident (although there is a pin which you could flip to
prevent that from happening). The hex plates resist torque equally about
all axes.

### More information

-   [Kirk enterprises](http://www.kirkphoto.com/) and especially [Really
    Right Stuff](http://www.reallyrightstuff.com/) have good info on the
    Arca QR system
-   [Hans Martens' guide to Manfrotto hexagonal Quick Release
    Plates](http://www.wildpicture.com/pages/photography/hexplates.htm):
    has pictures of different plates.

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/head.html)
