Large format lenses: generalities, classic vs modern issue

Large format lenses: generalities, classic vs modern
----------------------------------------------------

**By [John Sparks](mailto:sparks@col.hp.com) for [the Large Format
Page](.)**

### Basic lens questions

#### What is the difference between symetrical and asymetrical?

A symetrical lens has two identical lens groups on either side of the
shutter facing in opposite directions. Several lens abberations are
automatically eliminated by symmetrical design (only at 1:1) so it's a
popular lens design, especially before the days of computers when all
the lens caculations were done by hand. The symmetrical designs require
fewer computations to design. If truely symmetrical, the lens will
perform best at 1:1. Asymetrical designs are all designs that are not
symmetrical. Today, almost all lenses are at least somewhat asymetrical
(the only exceptions I know of are lenses like the G-Claron, Apo-Ronar
and other lenses optimized for use at 1:1). Any lens that is truely
designed for distant subjects must be at least somewhat asymetrical.

There is nothing fundamental that makes symetrical or asymetrical
designs better than the other.

#### What is the difference between coated and non-coated?

Coatings are applied to all air/glass interfaces to reduce the
reflections off these interfaces. This reduces flare and increases
contrast. There are actually three types, non-coated, single coated and
multicoated. Single coating was first developed in 1936 and most lenses
made since WWII have been at least single coated. Multicoating was
developed later (late 60's or early 70's??) and most current lenses are
multicoated.

The biggest advantage to coatings is to allow the lens designer to make
more complex lens designs with more air/glass interfaces. More complex
designs can decrease abberations giving a sharper lens or a lens with
more coverage. For the fairly simple designs used by most large format
lenses, the difference between single and multi-coatings is relatively
small but the difference between uncoated and single-coated is
significant.

The best lens designs before coatings were only 2 or 3 lens groups (the
number of groups indicates the numbers of air spaces, each group is a
set of lens elements that are cemented together with no air spaces).
Modern large format lenses are mostly 4 groups and some (particularly
wide angles which need better corrections to get their wider coverage)
have 5 or 6 groups or more.

Multicoating's real contribution was to allow the 12 to 15 group zoom
lenses possible. Without multicoating, these lenses would be unusably
low contrast.

#### What is the significance of elements and groups?

Not very much just from the numbers. More elements and groups allow more
degrees of freedom for the lens designer to make a better corrected
lens, but with care and some limitations (like small maximum aperature
or small coverage), very good lenses can be made with few elements and
groups.

As I wrote above, more groups means more air-spaces and requires better
coatings. The best of the large format lenses priar to coatings had only
2 groups (like the Dagor and Protar) or maybe 3 groups like the Tessar.
The Dagor and Protars have good coverage, but are only really sharp at
f/16 or small aperatures while the Tessars are good at relatively wide
aperatures but with limited coverage.

After coatings were developed, most lenses were 4 groups (with a few 3
group tessars still around and some 5 or 6 group lenses) as this gives a
better corrected design for a faster lens with good coverage like the
current plasmats with 70-80 degree coverage that are very sharp even
wide open.

### Classic vs Modern lenses

I think "modern" means: maximizing coverage, multicoating, computer
design, modern glass choices, good sharpness at all aperatures rather
than requiring the f/22 to f/45 needed for good sharpness with older
lenses. They will be sharper lenses, especially when you can avoid
diffraction effects from stopping way down. Any wide angle by Nikkon or
Fuji, Rodenstock Grandagons and Schneider Super Angulons are the
"modern" wide angle lenses.

There's some stuff written about older lenses in the view camera book by
Steve Simmons. There's also been a lot in various back issues of View
Camera and Darkroom Techniques magazines (especially articles by Ron
Wisner who knows a great deal about older lenses). Anyway for a brief
overview, your best bet is to get used lenses of current or almost
current designs. There was a big revolution in the 50's in 60's of
computer designed multicoated lenses that really perform much better
than the older lenses. This is especially true for 4x5. Larger formats
require less enlargment, smaller aperatures with their greater
diffraction so differences between lenses matters less. With really
large format and contact printing only you can use almost any lens you
can find that covers the format. Any Fuji or Nikkor lens can be
considered modern as can most by Schneider or Rodenstock.

For more specific answers, I'll divide the lenses into three groups,
wideangles, normals and long lenses.

-   Wideangles: Here more than anywhere, modern lenses are really the
    best. These are Schneider Super Angulon, Rodenstock Grandagon,
    Nikkor SW and Fuji NSWS. Schneider introduced their first Super
    Angulons in the mid 50's so there are quite a few older ones out
    there (the others are newer but still turn up used). The older ones
    have some chrome rather than the current all black housings so look
    older, sell for less but preform pretty much the same. The older
    wide angles that work fairly well are Schneider Angulons, Wide-angle
    Dagors and Wide-field Ektars. This is in order of decreasing
    coverage, the Angulons at 90mm and the Wide-field Ektars at 135mm
    work fairly well on 4x5 (though less coverage than a modern wide
    angle).
-   Normal lenses: The current and almost current normal lenses are
    Schneider Apo-Symmar, Symmar-S, Rodenstock any Sironar, Nikkor W,
    Fuji NWS, WS and W. Older lenses that work fairly well are Symmar,
    Dagor, Protar, Commercial Ektar. I'm sure I'm leaving out quite a
    few usable lenses.
-   Long Lenses: Many of the normal lenses come in longer versions
    (especially for formats smaller than 8x10). There are also some
    other lenses that can be used here that don't cover enough for
    normal lens use. The modern examples are Nikkor M, Fuji CS,
    Schneider G-Clarons and Artars, Rodenstock Apo-Ronars. The best of
    the older long lenses are Goerz Apo-Artars (the Red Dot Artars were
    coated but not multicoated, older Artars were not).

All the lenses I currently use are modern lenses. I have one older 135mm
lens from a press camera that actually works pretty well for B&W. It has
very limited coverage on 4x5 and much lower contrast that my other
lenses, but with B&W I can increase contast pretty easily to compensate
for it. 16x20 prints from 4x5 negatives don't look less sharp than from
my other lenses, but I'd guess I have to print on 1-2 grades higher
contrast paper. I have made a few transparencies with it but the shutter
is erratic enough that getting good exposures was difficult. The colors
are quite a bit less saturated than from modern lenses.

For 4x5, I generally prefer modern lenses, though the best of the older
lenses still perform well. With many older lenses you will get much
sharper results with a yellow filter (many were designed when films were
ortho or blue sensitive). Color requires only the best of old lenses or
modern ones (older lenses will give softer more pastel renderings
compared to modern saturated ones). With larger formats, older lenses
may be the best or only choice and the smaller or no enlargment means
less resolution is required. I have several older lenses I use on 8x10
though I can tell the difference even here compared to modern ones.

Have you ever made the same photograph with a modern lens and an older
good uncoated lens of similar photographs. I have (in B&W). From seeing
the results, I don't think I could pick a given print and say which lens
made that photograph, but given two prints made of the same subject with
modern and older lenses, it's quite clear which one is which. In color,
I think I could even pick which lens was which without the side by side
comparison (though the older lenses may yield pleasing images in color).
The biggest problem with using older lenses with color (particularly
color transparencies) is the questionable accuracy and repeatabiliy of
old shutters. The ones I've owned vary enough that getting accurately
exposed transparencies, even with wide bracketing, is very hit or miss.

But, I'm talking here about old uncoated lenses. With last generation
modern multicoated non-apo lenses compared to the current apo lenses,
I'm not sure I could pick which is which in side by side comparisions.
There is very little difference between a Apo-Symmar and Symmar-S for
example. The Apo lens is very slightly sharper, but you probably get
more sharpness variations from film position in the holder than the
difference between these two lenses (or similar lenses from other
manufacturers).

I a lot of cases, older shutters have more problems than older lenses.
Shutters can be replaced, but often cost more than an older lens is
worth. A shutter who's speeds are off (almost all older shutters) is not
a problem as long as the speeds are consistant (you just need to have
the speeds checked and use the actual speeds instead of the marked
speeds). An eratic shutter is useless.

Small scratches or "cleaning marks" have no real effect on image quality
and mean much lower prices, but cloudy areas or other marks covering a
fairly large area of the lens will reduce contrast and resolution (try
to think of the mark as a percentage of the surface of the lens, a
scratch covering 1% or less of the lens will have almost unnoticable
effect while one covering 1/3 of the lens is much worse).

### Importance of corrections by [Richard Knoppow](mailto:dickburk@ix.netcom.com)

There are two issues here, aberrations and coating. Coating first.

Coating prevents flare. Flare can be either an overall haze or ghost
images. If we consider the haze only, its effect is to lower the
contrast of the shadow areas of the image. In B&W this can be
compensated for satisfactorily (if there is not too much flare) by using
short toe film (high contrast in the shadows) and simply developing or
printing for a little more contrast. In color, the haze, because it is
mixture of all the light recieved by the lens, tends to reduce the
saturation of all colors. There is less flexibility with color film for
correcting this sort of fault. None, really with reversal materials.
Also, since single coatings are more effective at some color than
others, it may result in a slight color cast, which, because it is due
to a colored haze, isn't easy to correct in any simple way. Multiple
coatings have much more even reduction of reflected light so improve the
color rendition as well as saturation.

The kind of flare that is manifested as ghose images or hot-spots is
much more damaging to images whether B&W or color and are more due to
the lens design than coating although coating will either reduce them or
get rid of them.

Ghost images or images of the diaphragm have much more to do with the
design of the lens than with coatings, although coating will reduce the
effect when it is present. I have several old, uncoated lenses which do
not produce ghost images. The main effect of lens flare is to generate
an overall glow, which tends to fill in shadow areas and reduce the
saturation and purity of colors in color photography, and to produce
halos or flary areas around bright objects. While the advise of often
given to use lens shades to reduce flare of uncoated lenses, a lens
shade has no effect on light going into the lens to produce an image.
They are mainly useful in cutting off non-image light which causes flare
by bouncing around inside the camera. Multiple layer coating extends the
range of colors over which the coating is effective. A single layer is
effective at a single color and its effect falls off on either side of
that paticular wave length. Because the range of colors used in normal
photography or visually is only about an octave, a single coating is
practical. Multiple coatings have a broader band of effectiveness. By
using several coatings of the right materials and thicknesses it is
possible to make the lens surfaces nearly completely non-reflective over
pretty much the entire bandwidth used for photography. For those with
backgrounds in electronics coating is related to filter theory and
transmission line theory. Essentially, a coating forms an impedance
matching section between the air and glass. The fewer glass-air
interfaces there are in the lens the less the effect of coating will
have on its performance.

A lens with residual aberrations may actually be \_less\_ noticeable
with color than with B&W! This is because of the phychology of seeing.
The brain interprets color images as having more detail in them than
they do (this is why color television is possible). Also, even when an
obvious color fringing is present, the fringes, in the case of lateral
color, will be sharp, and the eye will see the image as sharp, whereas
the same image in B&W will have all the colors integrated in the image
which will look blurred. Even box cameras will take surprizingly good
looking color pictures. Where panchormatic film is used, as is the
almost universal practice today, a lens with superior color correction
will make superior images in B&W as well as color. Many older lenses, (I
mean the 70+ year ones) were designed with the assumption that ortho
film would be used, and the acromatic correction was made toward the
blue end because that's what the film recorded. More modern acormat
design moved the colors more toward the yellow for panchormatic film.
Also, modern glass types (post 1940) permit much smaller overall
chromatic deviations regardless of the wavelengths chosen.

The argument about the definition of apochromatic and whether certain
lenses are really apo's is somewhat silly. The real issue is the maximum
deviation of the corrections at any color. Where a lens is to be used
only with very sharp selective filters, the correction at specific
wavelengths that correspond to the filters may be enough for perfect
images but that is not a very common condition. The generic definition
of color correction is that an acromatic lens is corrected for two
colors, an apochromatic one three colors, and a superchromatic one for
four or more. Modern lens design permits the designer to correct for any
number of colors although there is, of course, a point of diminishing
returns in cost vs: performance.

Warren Smith demonstrates in his book on design that a properly designed
acromat may have better overall chromatic correction than an apochromat.
He also demonstrates the design of superchromats.

Rodenstock and other manufacturers now use an ISO definition of
apochromatic that is based on the lens having very small deviations from
ideal. This may nott be in agreement with the rigorous definition used
for microscope objectives but nonetheless, the performance, even for
color separation purposes is likely to be superior to a "true
apochromat" which is what matters. I suspect these lense are actually
superchromats. The ISO standard, or rather, family of standards, which
specifies this definition runs into a huge number of documents to which
I haven't got access.

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/lenses-general.html)


