Soft-Focus Lenses and Techniques
--------------------------------

**By [Ernest Purdum](mailto:Ernestpurdum@aol.com) © 2003 for
[largeformatphotography.info](/)**

*Critic A: "This image has a certain ethereal quality.\
Critic B: "It's a fuzzy picture."*

The use of soft-focus lenses has always been somewhat controversial as
well as rather difficult.  To me, they are a rather specialized tool,
something like the fish-eye lenses.  I have seen many fish-eye pictures
I didn't care for at all, but a few I found wonderful.  Similarly, there
are awful soft-focus images, but some of the all-time great photographs
are soft.  The names Stieglitz and Steichen jump into mind. Many think
of these lenses as merely a way to "erase wrinkles", but in the right
hands they can help in creating beautiful landscapes and provide a mood
that strengthens other photographs.  Soft-focus lenses are tools.  Like
other tools they can provide results that are good or bad.

No lens is perfect.  All lenses have defects, known as aberrations, that
cause the image to be less than perfect.  Softness of focus is the
result of one or more of these aberrations being strong enough to be
noticeable.  One aberration is the "spherical".  It is comparatively
easy to grind a lens surface which is a segment of a sphere, but a
surface like that can't quite put an image into correct focus.  Lens
designers have to use several surfaces working together to reduce
spherical aberration to useful levels.  The most common means of
producing a soft-focus lens is to allow some spherical aberration to
remain.  A caution.  Some very early soft focus lenses also had
significant amounts of chromatic aberration, they couldn't focus
different colors onto the same surface.  Unless you intend to use only
blue-sensitive film, no longer readily available, these would not be a
good idea.  The tip for identifying these lenses is that they will not
contain an  achromatic component - two or more glasses together.     
Two examples are the Dallmeyer-Bergheim a telephoto soft-focus lens, and
the Puligny-Puyo. 

Many photographers still alive, and perhaps still working, today,
started off with a soft-focus lens, although they probably have never
thought of it that way.  During the 1920's and 30's, Box Brownies and
other simple cameras were apt to be fitted with a single meniscus lens -
one piece of glass with convex curves on both surfaces, thicker in the
middle than the edges.  These exhibited most every aberration in the
book, but had a small enough aperture that images were usable. 

There are two categories of people.  Those who divide into categories,
and those who do not.  There are two categories of soft-focus lens. 
Those which provide selection of softness without changing the aperture,
and those which do not.  let's discuss the latter first.  The smaller
the aperture, the less spherical aberration affects the image.  This
provides the basis for making the simpler forms of soft-focus lenses. 
You need only two pieces of glass to make a basic achromat, a lens which
will focus different colors of light together well enough to provide a
usable image, but which has too much spherical aberration to produce a
sharp image at larger apertures.  Put a diaphragm in front of this lens,
stop it down to f16, and you can make a fairly sharp photograph.  This
is the construction of two of the four soft-focus lenses that I am aware
of being made today.  These are the Rodenstock Imagon and the current
version of the Fujinon soft-focus lenses. (Earlier Fujinon SF lenses
were triplets.)  These lenses have peculiar diaphragms - removable discs
with central holes surrounded by a ring of smaller holes which can be
opened or closed.  Buyers of used lenses should be sure that all the
discs are present.  Imagon lenses are made in 250 and 300mm focal
lengths as well as versions for medium format cameras.  The Fujinons
come in 180 and 250mm lengths.  There can be an occasional problem with
these lenses.  Strong highlights can be surrounded by a ring of little
lights - an image of the diaphragm. 

The other two current soft-focus lenses are made by Yamasaki and Cooke. 
Under the "Congo" name, soft focus triplets are made by Yamasaki in  150
and 200mm lengths.  To date, Cooke produces only one size, the 9"
(229mm) PS945.  The Cooke design is based on a very old lens, the
Pinkham-Smith, which, along with the Busch Nicola Perscheid, has become
something of a cult item, particularly in Japan, receiving very high
prices on the used market.  There were several series of P& S lenses,
later sold under the Smith name only, which differed in their
characteristics.  I don't know which was used as a design basis by
Cooke.   

Speaking of used items, most are quite old, but there is less reason to
reject a soft-focus lens because of age than there is when searching for
a normal lens.  O.K., it won't be as sharp as a new lens.  You don't
want it to be.  It won't be coated, and it won't have the contrast of
later designs.  Most of your subjects will not want high contrast
treatment.  Flare could be a problem, but that's what lens shades and
lighting control are for.  Many soft-focus lenses have rather narrow
coverage for their focal lengths and this can be helpful where flare is
concerned. 

Still speaking of lenses which control the amount of softness only by
the aperture, there are many different designs which may be available at
least occasionally.  One of the more common is the Wollensak Veritar. 
They have an achromat pair at the back and a large meniscus lens at the
front.  The combination gives a peculiar result in stopping down.  All
the gain in depth of field is behind the plane of sharp focus, so
instead of focusing on an eye when making a portrait, you need to focus
on the tip of the nose.    They are among the few older soft-focus
lenses which came in (large) synchronized shutters.  A still earlier
Wollensak product was the Verito.  Except for the two smallest sizes,
this was an f4 lens, the back group of which could be used by itself. 
It may have been a Rapid Rectilinear type, but more likely a Petzval. 

The Kodak Portrait Lens is an achromat like those of the Imagon and
Fujinon lenses, but has a normal diaphragm instead of removable discs. 
The Spencer Port-Land, the Hanovia "Kalosat" and the Cooke Achromatic
Portrait are of similar construction.  The same description would also
apply  to early "landscape lenses.  The basic difference is that those
intended as soft-focus lenses have larger apertures. 

Some Dallmeyer lenses fall into this grouping.  One type was just called
the "Dallmeyer Soft Focus.  It appears to be similar to the Kodak. 
Another was the "Mutac", unusual in that it was a triple convertible. 
You could use the lens complete or with either of the cells by itself. 

The Petzval Portrait was a special case, not really a soft-focus lens,
since it is very sharp in the center.  The very first mathematically
computed lens, it goes back to within a year of the public introduction
of photography and the aim was to produce a lens fast enough to take
people pictures.  Softness in the outer areas was not intentional, but
was accepted in order to attain the desired speed.  It also has an
inward curving field.  Aside from wide-angles, most of the Darlot lenses
found today are modified Petzval types, some, the Ross, for example,
offering a flatter field.    Burke & James were still offering new
modified Petzval type portrait lenses into the 1970's. 

The other category consists of a normal lens, as far as the glass is
concerned, with a means of varying the lens elements so as to produce a
controllable amount of spherical aberration, thus giving you some
measure of control independent of the aperture.  Stopping down will, of
course,  still create a sharper image, but you have a degree of control
over depth of field in addition to amount of diffusion. 

Here we go with categories again.  Some of these lenses are based on
anastigmat designs, some are not.  Those which are not are mostly
Petzval designs, and those most frequently seen are made by Dallmeyer,
who started making portrait lenses with diffusion control in 1866.  You
want shallow depth of field?  Try the Dallmeyer Patent Portrait No. 8D,
37" (934mm) focal length, f6.  If speed is your thing, the B series was
f3.  Most of these well deserve the term "brass cannon".  You need a
very solid camera with a large lensboard to make use of all but the
smallest sizes.  The glass ranged up to 6" diameter.  They were also
extremely expensive, up to over \$400 at a time when you could buy an
Eastman View Camera for \$19.00.  The smaller sizes carried a rack and
pinion focusing movement, and you had to pay extra for an iris diaphragm
instead of Waterhouse stops.  Ross also made lenses of this type in f3.5
aperture. 

The Wollensak "Vitax" is probably a Petzval type.  It was made in at
least three sizes from ten to 16 inches (254 to 406mm).  It is
distinctive in having a knob on the side as the diffusion adjustment
means.  It may be found in a "Studio" shutter, an iris diaphragm type
working in only the "Bulb" mode.  Also apparently a Petzval type is  the
Eastman Portrait Lens, not to be confused with the Kodak Portrait of
much later production.  "Eagle" Portrait Lenses were sold by George
Murphy Inc., and I think this probably was a Murphy house brand.  There
were several series, both with and without the diffusion adjustment. 

  Turning to the anastigmats, many makers provided at least a few lenses
with a soft focus adjustment added to lenses selected from their normal
production range.  An exception was the Graf "Variable", designed from
the start as an adjustable diffusion type.  The name derives from the
fact that the focal length and the aperture changed a little as the soft
focus was selected.      Edward Weston was among the several prominent
users of Graf lenses.  Wollensak made some lenses of this type, probably
Tessars.    The ones I have seen were Series II, but there may have been
others.  In England, they were made by Taylor, Taylor & Hobson   
(Cooke), Dallmeyer, Beck and possibly others.  Cooke lenses are the most
common, in Series II, f4.5 and Series VI, f5.6, but not all Series II
Cookes have the diffusion device.  Many Cooke lenses have very prominent
adjustment handles with two finger openings, sometimes referred to as
"spectacles".  The absence of these does not necessarily mean that there
is no diffusion adjustment, however.  The only Continental anastigmats
with a soft-focus feature that have come to my attention are the
Voigtlander "Universal" Heliar and the Zeiss  Portrait Unar, also made
under license by Bausch & Lomb.    There probably have been others,
though. 

Like other tools, the use of soft-focus lenses improves with practice. 
There is a problem in that the groundglass gives only a limited idea of
what the final print will look like.  It would be a good idea to take a
series of otherwise identical photos with differing settings of aperture
and (if provided) diffusion control, when first trying out a soft-focus
lens.  The resulting prints can then be used as references when making 
future photographs. 

There are many methods of softening focus without use of a special
lens.  One idea, frequently suggested, is to diffuse the focus during
enlargement.  There is a commercial item for this purpose, the Pictrol, 
too small at 2" inside diameter to go in front of most large format
camera lenses.  The problem here is that diffusion during a printing
process  produces a different result.  Diffusion onto a negative spreads
light out into the shadow areas.  Diffusion during printing spreads
darkness into the highlights.  The result has been described as being
suitable for portraits of the Addams family. 

One early device mechanically jiggled the focus control during exposure,
the apparent aim being to increase depth of field.  Some early lenses
were advertised as having great depth of field.  This was the same as
saying that they were soft. 

Some experimenters have used the rather hazardous means of partially
unscrewing a cell or cells of a normal lens.  My first photograph with a
new wide angle lens produced a picture of a youth choir looking somewhat
more angelic than expected.  I traced the phenomenon to a lensboard a
little too thick to allow the cells to fully come into position.  As it
turned out, the choir director liked the result.    If I were going to
try something  that might result in accident to the lens, I think I
would try it on one of the surplus Xerox lenses.  These are typically 8
1/4",  f4.5, made by very good manufacturers.  As of this writing, Copy
Raptars  are available at
[www.surplusshed.com](http://www.surplusshed.com) at \$10.00.  The last
I knew, these lenses by T,T& H, B& L and Rank were available  at
[www.candhsales.com](http://www.candhsales.com) at \$16.50.  The Raptars
appear to be normal production items, while the others were designed
especially for copy machines and may have been color corrected for the
near monochromatic light of these machines. 

Some people have smeared vaseline onto the front of their lenses.  I
think I would prefer to smear up a filter rather than a lens.  Others
have used everything from cigar smoke to a piece of ladies stocking
material in front of the lens.  In the latter case, sometimes holes are
burned into the fabric to modify the results.  Hollywood types have
employed fog machines.  There  are commercial diffusing discs.  The
Zeiss Softar seems to be the most highly regarded device of this type. 
It has a series of concentric thread-like rings formed into the glass
and is rather expensive.. 

There are ways of upsetting carefully calculated spherical aberration
reduction besides changing element spacing.  A thick glass plate is
one.  Adding various combinations of weak positive and negative
elements, Proxar and Distar and the like, might be another. 

I have found surprisingly little in the way of compiled information on
this subject.  This little article is an attempt to fill this apparent
gap.  All comments, suggestions and particularly provisions of
additional information are especially welcome.

#### [View/add comments](http://www.largeformatphotography.info/lfforum/topic/497192.html)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](mailto:Ernestpurdum@aol.com)

Ernestpurdum@aol.com
