------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Part of [LargeFormatPhotography.info](/)**

This list was compiled, edited for dead links, and re-ordered in 2005 by
Nitish Kanabar from the user generated [Boohoo linkserver provided by
Philip
Greenspun](http://www.greenspun.com/boohoo/related.tcl?page_id=TuanLF).
That link would have more recent additions, but as of 2007, it is
frequently (maybe even permanently) disabled due to out-of-control spam.
Currently, it is not possible to add automatically links to this page.

[**20x24 Artist Printed Studio Images Visualized By 8x10
Camera**](http://www.fotopict.com) - introduction to the conceptual
terms of "Grafism" by visual artist and photographer Eugene Freeman

[**360 - Panoramic Images Extremadura
(Spain)**](http://www.iespana.es/paseovirtual) - Panoramic images
Extremadura, 360 degrees, Old Town of Cáceres has been declared World
Heritage by the UNESCO in 1986, Ruins Romans of Mérida, Trujillo,
Granadilla, rivers Valle del Jerte, etc. by Manuel Trinidad.

[**8x10 Reflex Camera**](http://www.beautyphoto.de) - fashion and beauty
photography with 8x10 reflex camera

[**A Collection Of Landscape, Seascape And Infrascape Photography, By
Gary Ell**](http://www.garyell.com) - Photographer Gary Ell displays
galleries of Infrared (infrascapes) Landscapes, Seascapes and
Documentary imagery. From Cape May, New Jersey, Nantucket
Massachussettes to the North Shore in Oahu Hawaii. These galleries are
an exquisite representation of the medium

[**A Gallery Of Fine Art Landscapes From The American West, Alaska And
Canada**](http://www.StevenFeyPhotography.com) - Steven Fey Fine Art
Photography Gallery and Studio is located in Seattle, Washington and
features Steven's large-format landscapes. All color prints are artist
produced on Ilfochrome and Fujiflex materials and Black and White work
is printed on fiber-based materials. Absolutely stunning to see!

[**ABCast Studios: Commercial Photography Services To UK
Businesses**](http://www.abcast.com) - ABCast Studios provides high
quality Advertising and Architectural photographic services to UK based
businesses. We are located in the London/Essex area and use digital,
medium format and large format in our photography.

[**Aaron Budd Photography**](http://www.aaronbudd.com/) - Architecture,
Adventure and Travel Photographer, large, medium, 35mm and digital
format photography, Toronto, Ontario

[**Abstract Fine Art Surreal Fine Art
Photography**](http://www.sites.onlinemac.com/jgregory) - Large format
surreal still lifes

[**Abstract Southwest - Photography By John
Villinski**](http://abstractsouthwest.com) - Fine art Black-and-White
and color photgraphy from the Southwestern US and Northwestern Mexico,
as well as some studio shots of collected southwestern items. My first
love are abstracts found in nature. I shoot most of my Black-and-White
with a 4x5 Calumet Woodfield M and most of my color with manual Minolta
equipment.

[**Adam Gibbs Photography**](http://www3.telus.net/agibbsphoto) -
Stunning large format images from around N.America. Intimate photographs
of patterns, water, wildflowers and more.

[**Alain-Marc Photography**](http://artgo.com/alain-marc/index.html) -
Welcome in this artist gallery. Polaroid transferts, personnal research
in black and white, worked with my Linhof 4x5 inch.

[**Alan Adams Photography, Fine Art
Prints**](http://www.alanadamsphotography.com) - Alan Adams Photography
displays large, limited edition, fine art prints for sale. Subject
matter varies but the primary focus is on majestic scenes found in
nature. The prints are large, signed and numbered, archival giclee'
prints made from medium format (6x7) and 4x5 negatives and
transparencies.

[**Alan
Gibson**](http://homepages.infoseek.com/~alangibson/html/Argphoto.htm) -
Black-and-White candids with a homemade hand-held wide angle 5x4 camera,
35mm jazz music photos from England.

[**Alan Ross' Web Page**](http://www.alanrossphotography.com) - An
assistant to Ansel Adams and a successful commercial photographer,
artist and teacher.

[**Albany Studios For Large Format In New
Zealand!**](http://www.albanystudios.co.nz) - studio photography,
dedicated to the production of high quality transparencies for
commercial and creative use. We offer a total concept/production
facility that will blow you away! See our website and contact us for
your assignment. Conceptual, Scenic, Stock, Digital too only if in small
format sorry! Cheers contact Robert asap!

[**Alec's Archives**](http://home.earthlink.net/~asoth/) - Several
galleries of black and white photographs by Minnesota photographer Alec
Soth. This site includes "From Here To There," a work in progress shot
entirely with an 8x10inch camera.

[**Alex Bond Photographer**](http://www.alexbond.com.au) - Large format
photographs of Western Australia's unique landscape, including many
national parks. Alex Bond publishes under the imprint of Stormlight
Publishing and produces a range of greeting cards, postcards, gift cards
and poster prints. Regions covered include Margaret River, Albany,
Stirling Range, Pilbara, Kimberley, Esperance, Porongurups, Kalbarri,
Pemberton, Walpole, Northcliffe, Cape Leeuwin, Augusta, Dunsborough,
Lancelin and other locations.

[**Alex Forsey Photography**](http://members.aol.com/sneiss2) - Some
comissioned fashion and portraits using a Wista 5X4 large format field
camera.

[**Alio\~Phote Gallery-photography By Steve
Karafyllakis**](http://www.stevekphoto.com) - Black-and-White
traditional and Infra-red landscapes from south Florida, the Greek
Islands, and various other US locations, taken with homemade 4x5, 2x3
and other largeand medium format cameras

[**Amateur 4x5 Show**](http://www.geocities.com/h_xd) - Just images, no
blah blah blah

[**Andreas Leemann**](http://www.andreas-leemann.ch) - Large Format
Photography in Black and White

[**Andres Suurkuusk**](http://www.suurkuusk.com) - color photographs in
medium and large format

[**Andrew Baugnet Photographic**](http://www.baug.net) - Large format
photograpraphic documentation of historic structures for the Historic
American Buildings Survey and the Historic American Engineering Record
(HABS/HAER)

[**Andrew Baugnet Photographic Documentation**](http://baug.net) -
Photographs of several Historic American Building Survey and Historic
American Engineering Record (HABS/HAER) projects as well as black and
white and color landscape pictures.

[**Andy Biggs African Photo Safaris**](http://www.andybiggs.com) -
Photographs from the American Southwest and from the Serengeti plains of
east Africa.

[**Ansel Adams Gallery.**](http://www.adamsgallery.com/) - need I say
more ? actually many great photographers beyond AA are represented

[**Anthony Roach Australian Landscapes**](http://www.anthonyroach.com) -
Evocative coastal landscapes and sea pool images, includes color 4x5
inch and 35 mm images

[**Architectural Photography By Paul Chaplo,
M.F.A.**](http://www.chaplo.com) - Texas based large format
architectural and landscape photographer focuses on large format 4x5
interior and exterior photography. Dallas and Ft. Fort Worth, TX. D/FW
area. Master of Fine Arts Photography Degree in from Rochester Institute
of Technology, years of Fortune 500 experience.

[**Architectural And Urbanscapes**](http://www.ronennuma.com) - Ronen
Numa, a professional photographer living and working in London, England.
A display of Architectural photos and Urbanscapes both commertial and
private work.

[**Architectural, Landscape And Night Photography By Lance
Keimig**](http://www.thenightskye.com) - I am primarily concerned with
the way that photographing at night expresses time. Until human beings
are able to travel at light speed, the passage of time is a constant.
Yet, the way we perceive twenty minutes in the dentist's chair, and
twenty minutes on the ski slopes could not be more different. Through my
work, I am investigating the nature of human perception of the passage
of time.

[**Architecture Photographer In Indonesia**](http://sonnysandjaya.com) -
architecture photographer using view camera/large format with some works
have been published in Australia and Singapore publication.

[**Argentum Fine Art
Photographers**](http://www.argentumfineartphoto.com) - Argentum Fine
Art Photographers is a group of large format artists who share a commone
aestetic vision. ALthough their subject matter may vary, their aim is to
create art that has a timeless beauty.

[**Arne
Croell**](http://www.f32.net/Services/Photographers/ArneCroell.html) -
Landscapes (US, Europe), Still lifes

[**BERTRAND Virgile Simon,
Photography.**](http://www.geocities.com/virgilesimon/) - French
photographer based in Hong Kong. Prtraits, architecture and stories.

[**Benjamin
Donaldson**](http://benjamindonaldson.tripod.com/photography/index.html)
- 8x10" view camera environmental portraits ranging from Priests, my
sisters, people touching snakes and funeral home directors.

[**Big Cypress Gallery. Clyde Butcher.**](http://clydebutcher.com/) -
The Black-and-White landscape photographer of Florida (esp. Everglades).
He uses 8X10, 11X14 and 12X2O formats. A nice site with beautiful
photos, journal by wife, newsletter, etc...

[**Big Island Photos**](http://www.bigislandphotos.com) - Large format
(Wista 45DX) and medium format (Mamiya RZ67) landscape photographs of
the Big Island of Hawaii and California.

[**Bigshotz Cirkut Panorama Photography In New
Zealand**](http://www.bigshotz.co.nz) - Large format black and white
panorama photography using the king of panorama cameras.....the rotating
Kodak Cirkut camera. Format size is 8 inches by 4 to 6 feet long.....who
said 8 x 20 was big!

[**Bill Collins Fine Art Photography**](http://www.intrex.net/PhotoArt)
- Large Format Photography

[**Bill La Brie's Ilfochrome Images Of
Nature**](http://www.visionsofnaturegallery.com) - Bill La Brie's
Visions Of Nature Gallery beautiful images of nature printed on
Ilfochrome paper

[**Bill Zorn Photographs**](http://www.billzorn.com) - From the southern
U.S. to central China, large format images of landscapes, landscape
detail, and our interaction with the land. Featured in Lenswork and
Black and White magazines.

[**Black And White Photo From Italy**](http://www.fabiomartino.com) -
Black and white photo from Italy Fine art, landscapes, people, life

[**Bloom Photography - Rebecca Bloom**](http://www.bloomphoto.com) -
Professional photographer Rebecca Bloom specializes in lightning
photography, southwestern US and New England landscapes using large and
medium formats. We feature online credit card processing and a monthly
newsletter with news and photography tips. Thanks for your interest!

[**Blueskyday Photography**](http://www.blueskyday.co.uk) - Landscape
photography from the north of England and the Highlands of Scotland.
Mainly medium format at the moment as I've just joined the world of
large format photography...

[**Bob Coates Photography**](http://www.bcphoto.vi) - St Thomas USVirgin
Islands based caribbean photographer. 4X5 and 35mm

[**Bob Herbst Photography**](http://www.bobherbst.com) - Bob Herbst has
been photographing and printing in platinum and silver gelatin for more
than 33 years. He has gained international recognition as a master
platinum printer, and his work is represented in collections in the U.S.
and Europe. Bob is a contributing writer for View Camera magazine and he
prints platinum editions on a commission basis. Bob teaches workshops on
platinum/palladium printing and has taught undergraduate and graduate
classes at the Cleveland Institute of Art, the University of Akron and
at Hiram College in Ohio. He is an officer and a member of the Board of
Trustees of the Friends of Photography of the Cleveland Museum of Art. A
selection of his work and information on his workshops can be viewed at
www.bobherbst.com. He can be reached via email at bobherbst@adelphia.net
, by phone at (330) 562-4854, or by mail at 619 Deepwood Drive, Aurora,
Ohio, 44202.

[**Bradford Architectural Photography,
Inc.**](http://www.kellybradford.com) - Architectural photography for
architects, interior designers, home builders, manufacturing firms,
construction companies, developers, kitchen and bath remodeling
professionals, advertising professionals, etc. Architectural
photographer Kelly Bradford is one of the very best architectural
photographers in the Denver-metro area. Our firm shoots everything in 4"
x 5" format and works with our clients to provide them with the
photographs that they envision. We strive to provide our clients with
the highest-quality, most professional photography. We travel to any
project location. Denver, Colorado.

[**Brian Ellis Large Format
Photographs**](http://www.ellisgalleries.com) - Photographs, mostly
large format, of landscapes, architecture, people, household objects,
and water, together with reviews of Linhof Technikardan, Tachihara,
Linhof Technika, Agfra Ansco, and Deardorff large format cameras, by a
Tampa, Florida large format photographer and teacher.

[**Brian Kosoff Studio**](http://www.kosoff.com) - Brian Kosoff is a
photographer based in NYC who shoots advertising still life and
landscape photography.

[**Brian McGuiness Photography**](http://bmacphoto.com) - Portrait /
Event / Fine Art including 4x5 seascapes

[**Brian Rose Homepage**](http://www.brianrose.com) - This is the
website of photographer Brian Rose. It features extensive selections
from his architectural portfolio as well as various art/documentary
projects. Included are photographs of the landscape of the former Iron
Curtain, the periphery of Amsterdam, and the rear buildings and yards of
Williamsburg, Virginia.

[**Brison Studio**](http://users.skynet.be/brison.be) - DIGITAL
PHOTOGRAPHY and large format photography with Sinar and Broncolor
equipment. Also digital photography combined with the Sinar equipment.

[**British Photographer In Saudi Arabia**](http://www.ashfordplatt.com)
- British Professional Photographer working in Saudi Arabia. A site of
personal landscape photography, of my working life and CV. Plus links.

[**Britt Pierson Photography**](http://www.bppstock.com) - based in Las
Vegas. Large format 4x5 to 35mm, to digital file.

[**Bromoil Photos**](http://andre_devlaeminck.tripod.com/) - My website
is of Bromoil photos of the countryside of Scotland

[**Bruce E. Rathbun Photography**](http://www.widevisions.com) -
Dedicated to the art of black and white fine art photography.
Specializing in contact printing on Kodak Azo. Formats include
8x10,11x14, 8x20. Subject matter include national parks and Midwestern
small towns focusing on the 8x20 panoramic format.

[**Bruce G. Collier Photography**](http://www.brucegcollier.com) - Large
and medium format photographic galleries focusing on travel. Galleries
include Croatia, Egypt, Greece, Jordan, Thailand, Oregon, and the rest
of the U.S.

[**Bruce M. Herman: Light On
Alaska**](http://www.photoportfolios.com/portfolios/Herman/herman.htm) -
Intimate color landscape photographs of Alaska by Bruce M. Herman. Most
were made with a large format camera. They are part of touring exhibit.
You may purchase Ilfochrome prints from this site.

[**Bruce Wehman's Large Format Website**](http://www.wehmancamera.com) -
Black and white photography of the Southwest and the Wehman Field
Camera.

[**Bulent Ozgoren Fine Art Photography**](http://www.bulentozgoren.com)
- Black and white landscape photography of Turkey.

[**Carey Bird Photography**](http://homepages.tig.com.au/~cbird) - Fine
Art Black-and-White landscape photographs of Australia and New Zealand.

[**Charles Cramer**](http://www.charlescramer.com) - Several intimate
landscapes in color (trees, rocks) and some Black-and-White, mostly of
the American West. 4x5.

[**Charles Farmer**](http://www.charlespfarmer-photo.com) -
Black-and-White photography of the US West. landscape, towns, figure.
Consulting, worshops and sales.

[**Charles Haire Images**](http://www.chimages.com) - Landscape and
studio general photography

[**Charles Haire Photography**](http://www.chpix.biz) - Large format,
35mm and digital photography. Product, Advertising, Landscape, Fine Art.

[**Charles Wood Photography**](http://cwoodphoto.com) - Landscape,
nature and travel photos, specializing in the red rock country of the
American Southwest. Medium and large format.

[**Cheuvront Studios Commercial Photography**](http://www.cheuvront.com)
- This website is the homepage of Cheuvront Studios,a full service
commercial photo/graphic studio located in Gainesville, Florida. We
specialize in conventional and digital imaging for the business
community.

[**Chip Williams**](http://www.chipwilliams.com) - Environmental
portraits, travel, and interior architectural work are featured in all
formats.

[**Chris Hill Photographer**](http://www.hillphotos.co.nz) - Landscapes
and Architecture from Taranaki, New Zealand mostly taken on a 4x5 inch
field camera. Visit my Gallery and see some of my latest work.

[**Christophe Cassegrain
Photographer**](http://perso.club-internet.fr/ccasseg) - Landscape and
Architecture photographer (France). Work with large format camera.

[**Christopher Burkett**](http://www.christopherburkett.com/) - One of
the masters of color landscape photography. This site presents a
retrospective of 20 years of work in 8x10, through a large selection of
images. Images are mostly abstracts and intimate scenes, mostly of
America, which celebrate the beauty of nature.

[**Christopher Hauth**](http://www.christopherhauth.com) - Award winning
large and medium format color images of the American West. Portfolios
include Wildflowers, Mountains and National Parks.

[**Christopher Perez**](http://www.hevanet.com/cperez/index.html) -
Technical info on lenses, including tests. Photographs: Black-and-White
landscapes, motorcycles, color flowers.

[**Chuck Hemard**](http://www.chuckhemard.com) - Childhood fascination
with looking out of the window of the moving car I was riding
in...Imagining and day dreaming of the possibilities from that day on.
Man as part of nature's process. Large format composite images of exit
ramp spaces and highway interchanges.

[**Circle Of Confusion**](http://www.northnet.org/jimbullard) - Jim
Bullard's home page. Medium and large format photos, photo lessons and a
collection of wit.

[**Claude Fiddler - Wilderness
Light.**](http://www.wildernesslight.com/) - Based in Eastern
California, the photographer of "The High Sierra, Wilderness of Light"
and "A Vast and Ancient Wilderness: Images of the Great Basin."
specializes in careful and considered 4x5 color landscape images from
very remote wilderness areas. The site has a gallery and several
articles.

[**ColdSnap Photography**](http://www.coldsnap.com) - We specialize in
outdoor, nature, and garden photography. Markets include; magazines,
book publishers, decor, and eductional photo-tours.

[**Commercial Photographers In Bradford, West
Yorks**](http://www.commercialphotography1.co.uk) - We are commercial
and advertising photographers, providing a specialised service to
commercial clients only, using both medium and large format equipment.

[**Contrasting Landscapes - Frank Dina
Photography**](http://frankdinaphoto.com) - Color photography of Chicago
and Southwest US. Photographer of book entitled, "Chicago Parks
Rediscovered"(2002)by Jannes Art Press and distributed by Northwestern
Univ. Press. Generally engaged in landscape and architectural
photography.

[**Corporate Industrial/Architectural
Photographer**](http://www.paulmcmullin.com) - Corporate photographer
who uses a Walker 5x4 field camera around the world. Often in adverse
conditions ie humidity,rain,ice etc.

[**Coyote Images -- Premium Nature
Photography**](http://www.coyoteimages.com) - A growing gallery of 35mm,
6x9 and 4x5 format photography of the desert Southwest and the Rocky
Mountains.

[**Craig Auckland |
Photographer**](http://www.aucklandphotographer.co.uk) - Craig Auckland
is an architectural, interiors, industrial and location Photographer.
Based in Bristol, UK.

[**Craig Stidham Photography**](http://www.cstidham.com) - Large format
platinum printing and fine art

[**DF Connors Photography**](http://www.dfconnors.com) - Large format
shooting; Epson 9600 archival printing as well as pt/pd - digital
workshops -- my passion is to participate in the process of creating
beautiful and thought-provoking images.

[**DIAZ-BERRIO - Photography**](http://diazberrio.planetaclix.pt) -
Writing with the Light.

[**Daniel Anderson
Photography**](http://www.danielandersonphotography.com) - Large format
Black and White Images from the American Southwest, midwest and Europe.
Site also describes Anderson's workshop programs.

[**Danny Burk Photography, LLC**](http://www.dannyburk.com) - Large
format and 617 panoramic work; specializing in fine North American
landscape, both color and black-and-white. Also some medium format work,
especially flower portraiture. Fine print sales, drum scanning service,
equipment reviews, extensive image galleries for print sales and image
licensing, and workshops in various areas. Several times yearly, an
Introduction to Large Format weekend workshop is offered. Sponsored by
Ebony Camera and Badger Graphic.

[**Dans Homepage**](http://www.shadow.net/~3108dm) - Professional
UnderWater Photographer and Large Format Hobbiest and Student.

[**David A. Goldfarb**](http://www.echonyc.com/~goldfarb/photo/) -
Photographs in a variety of formats from 35mm to 11x14", Black-and-White
and color--Scenes of New York City, landscapes, travel, birds,
portraits, still life, abstract.

[**David G Hall**](http://www.davidghall.com) - People and places, from
a breakdancer in Spain to a radio listener on a street corner in
Xochimilco, Mexico.

[**David Muench Photography**](http://www.muenchphotography.com/) - site
of the famous landscape american landscape photographer and his son
Marc. many beautiful color images.

[**David Owen Hawxhurst Photography**](http://www.hawxhurst.com) -
Commercial and Fine Art Photography focusing on the Chesapeake Bay
Region as well as the world as a whole. 4x5 and 35mm images capturing
people and environments.

[**Dean Sauskojus Photography**](http://www.dsprophoto.com) - One of the
best nature photography sites on the web. You won't be disappointed.
Stunning large format images of the Northern Rockies, Grand Tetons,
Yelowstone National Park, and natural areas of Washington, Oregon and
Idaho.

[**Deathvalleyphoto**](http://www.Deathvalleyphoto.com) - Extraordinary
location, extraordinary images. 8x10

[**Derek Brown Photography**](http://www.derekbrown.co.uk) -
Black-and-White 5"x4" urban landscapes and some still lifes included on
this site from a photographer based in Greenwich,London,U.K. Uses lith
printing for a portion of his work

[**Developing Light**](http://www.developinglight.com) - Jahnavi
ananda's interpretive black and white landscapes. Sensual and powerful,
sometimes subtle, images of the organic landscape as scultured elements
of the human form and monuments of nature's creation. Print sales,
workshops, and fine art printing services.

[**Diallo Photography**](http://www.diallophotography.com) - A
collection of fine art photographs and services offered by New York City
photographer Amadou Diallo.

[**Digital Photography**](http://www.kisselev.com) - Digital and Large
format photographs.

[**Digital And Photographic Company**](http://www.superchrome.co.uk) -
We are a digital and photographic company, specializing in the
production of displays, large format prints, canvas prints and
exhibition graphics.

[**Directlight**](http://www.directlight.com) - Large and medium format
photography of Natural and Urban landscape, emphasizing shape, form and
light. Requires Flash 6 plugin.

[**Dmitri Orlov
Photography**](http://www.iemrams.spb.ru/english/raznoeen/orlov.htm) -
Unusual large and medium format color images: nature, microcosms,
landscapes (California and St.Petersburg, Russia)

[**Don Cameron**](http://www.doncameron.com) - Professional landscape,
portrait and commercial photographer, now focusing entirely on teaching
workshops, individual study and fine art sales.

[**Don Hall Photography**](http://www.donhallphotography.com) - This
site features large format color images of the American West. Current
galleries include The Southwest, The Pacific Northwest, and Coos County,
Oregon. Also features technical information on equipment, processing,
and printing (Ilfochrome).

[**Don Harbor Photography**](http://www.donharbor.com) - Though my site
was developed to be viewed by graphic designers and art directors who
have assignments for fine arts oriented black and white images, many
other people worldwide seem to enjoy it. My specialties are portraiture,
landscapes, and still life (listed on my site as PEOPLE, PLACES, and
THINGS). I work in all formats up to 8” x 10” utilizing a wide variety
of current and vintage cameras and lenses.

[**Douglas Busch Fine Art Photography**](http://www.superlarge.com) -
Douglas Issac Busch has been making super large format images and
cameras since the 1970's. Click here to go to his site and view images,
press releases, book information as well as custom built cameras and
equipment.

[**Dr. Naseeb Baroody:BlackandWhite Fine Art**](http://baroodyphoto.com)
- 50 years of photographic expression yielding sensitive and compelling
images of southeastern US coast, varied nature scenes and rural
Egypt.Silver prints are made with medium and large format;archivally
processed and toned.

[**East Midlands Monochrome Group**](http://www.emmg.graphy.org.uk) -
This Group of photographic enthusiasts was set up about four years ago
to foster interest in the monochrome image. Black and White rules here
in Middle England. Production methods favour all formats, but the
balance is for medium format with a growing interest in 5 x 4. The group
prides itself on being a forum for the exchange of ideas, and betterment
of technique rather than a competitive arena. We do however support
local and national exhibitions, as well as stage our own. New members
are always welcome, and those interested will find details of our
meetings and venue on the website as well as a selection of members, and
supporters work.

[**Eden Man From H.K.**](http://www.4d-studio.com.hk) - A professional
photographer.

[**Edward - Cole Weston Homepage**](http://www.edward-weston.com/) -
Official Home Page of Edward and Cole Weston

[**Edward Pierce Photography**](http://www.edpiercephoto.com) -
Contemplative landscape photography of Vermont and New England.

[**Edward Purcell Architectural Photography**](http://www.epap.net) -
Professional Architectural Photography in the upper Midwest. Exclusively
in large format.

[**Eisaman Photography**](http://www.eisamanphotography.com) - Creating
photographs for Business,Individuals and my own amusement......

[**Ellis Vener Photography**](http://www.ellisvener.com) - I am a
commercial phootgrapher who specializes in creating portrait,
architectural, and studio photography for use by editorial, corporate
and advertising clients. My work is also in many art collections. I use
a variety of cameras -- 4x5, 6x17cm, medium format, 35mm and digital.
Currently i am based in Houston, Texas and travel widely.

[**Eloy A. Esteban**](http://personal1.iddeo.es/ret005ry) - Photographer
specializes in still, product, catalog, food, landscapes and
architecture. In studio, location and catalog photography for
advertising and commercial product. Large format color photography.

[**Elsa Dorfman And The Polaroid 20x24**](http://www.elsa.photo.net) -
Elsa Dorfman has been working w/ the unique Polaroid 20x24 for twenty
years.

[**Elton Pope-Lance Photography**](http://www.popelance.com) -
Photographs of architecture (primarily color) and landscapes (primarily
b/w) as well as an interesting and continually changing array of other
odd subjects. 95% LF with medium format and 35mm stuff thrown in from
time to time.

[**Enrique Vila - Photographer**](http://www.vilaphoto.tk) - Landscape
and Fine Art Photography. Mainly Large Format using Black and White
processes. Many of my images represent an abstract or alternate view of
a common object or situation.

[**Epiphanie Photographic Studio**](http://epiphanie.com) - Super large
format photography with antique cameras and lenses. Vintage printing
processes: Kallitype and Platinum. Image sizes 5x7, 8x10, 11x14, 12x20,
14x17, 16x20, 20x24 and 30x40. (mostly 16x20 and 20x24)

[**Eric Evans Photography**](http://www.ericevansphotography.com) -
Phoenix based large format photographer who also shoots digital . I
shoot with a Arca Swiss camera with Rodenstock lenses

[**Erik Gould Photography**](http://erikgould.net) - Site features 4x5
contact Printing Out Paper prints of Rhode Island USA urban landscapes;
a documentation of the historic abandoned Gorham Siver factory and a
portable, walk-in camera obscura. Also color and black and white work in
other formats: 1/2 frame, 35mm and 6x9.

[**Erik Tiemens | Photography And
Painting**](http://watersketch.com/photographs.html) - A selection of MF
and LF images, using a Horseman FA 4x5, Mamiya C330, RB67 and my old
Speed Graphic. Experiments with the images using programs as Painter,
connects the process of traditonal painting and photography for me.

[**Experienced And High Quality Architectural Photographer Jerry
Swanson**](http://www.swansonphoto.com) - Architectural and interiors
photography for hotels and casinos. Quality and exceptional service for
over twenty-five years. Locations include Oregon, Louisiana,
Mississippi, Wisconsin and Minnesota. Will travel to all locations.
AIAP, NAAPA, USA

[**Fashion And Beauty Photography By JAY
Carreon**](http://www.musecube.com/JAYcarreon) - Greetings! This is my
online portfolio of my newest fashion and beauty images shot with my
recently acquired Calumet Cadet 4x5" view camera. I shoot Fuji
Quickloads in a Fuji Quickload holder (for which I tend to favor
Fujichrome Provia 100F) and proof my shots using Polaroid film for which
I have a Polaroid 545i holder. I am quite pleased with the results so
far and am very excited at the prospect of further exploring the
possibilities of the 4x5" format!!!

[**Felipe J. Alcoceba Photography**](http://www.alcoceba.com) - Web page
of Felipe J. Alcoceba, photographer from the agency Bilderberg (Hamburg)

[**Fine Art Landscape Photography**](http://nathanielbrowning.com) -
Large Format landscape photography from throughout the western United
States including the Tetons, Red Desert, Utah and little known or
photographed regions of Yellowstone National Park. Panoramic images
cropped from 4x5 negatives and traditional silver gelatin prints from
Jackson, Wyoming photographer.

[**Fine-Art Prints: Illustrations And Drawings Of Robert And Photographs
Of Martin Miller**](http://www.millervisuals.com) - For most of the last
32 years, I have been using photography as a creative means to explore
the metaphysical or spiritual dimension of life as distinct from its all
too pervasive material dimension. The natural world has been the subject
of my camera’s eye, but the mystery of the human psyche has been the
subject of my inner eye. The organizing principle of my work is no less
a challenge than the apprehension and expression through visual metaphor
of the hidden realms of the mind, the source of both our fears and our
miraculous creative capacities. My explorations have gravitated to three
sources of inspiration and insight into The Great Mystery: the
collective unconscious, mysticism, and the order/chaos synergy. The
literal subjects of my photographs may be wood, water, and rock, but, at
their best, they evoke the essential mystery of life and the possibility
of man's spirit transcending his material existence.

[**Frank Doering Photography**](http://www.doeringphoto.com/) -
Black-and-White landscape, portraiture, and 3-D. Most pictures taken
with large format view cameras and toned in various brews.

[**Frank Petronio Photographer**](http://www.frankpetronio.com) -
Portfolio website for Frank Petronio photographer. Many large format
environmental and social subjects from Frank’s perspective.

[**Freelance Photographer**](http://www.tozzophoto.com) - Professional
photographic services for print and web.

[**Gary Begin Photography**](http://www.garybegin.com) - Award Winning
Bradenton, FL photographer. Specializing in Beach wall portraits,
environmental portraits, landscapes, modeling composites/portfolios,
boudior and advertising photography. All size formats from large, medium
and 35mm employed. Guaranteed excellent results.

[**Gary Nylander Fine Art Photography**](http://www.garynylander.com) -
Black and white Landscapes of the Western Canada.

[**Geoffrey Kuehn Photo Gallery**](http://www.kuehnphotos.com) - Large
format, fine art photos of the harsh,ever changing light on common
subjects in the urban environment.

[**Georg Nyman Photography And Optics**](http://www.gnyman.com) - George
Nyman is a well known expert in optics, imaging and photography,
especially scientific photography. But his prime target outside
scientific - mostly microscopic - objects is nature and landscape. On
the theoretical side, he teaches optics and gives lectures and seminars.
His primary equipment is a Linhof Master Technika 4x5" but as a camera
collector, he also shoots often with an older 5x7" Technika, a 4x5"
Graphlex and some medium format equipment.

[**George Diamantopoulos Photography**](http://www.greekpicture.com) -
Photography by George Diamantopoulos. You can see more than 500 unique
color landscapes from Greece in Large Format 4x5, medium 120, and
panoramic 6x17.

[**Graeme Hird**](http://www.goldeneyephoto.com) - Australian landscapes
on 5x4 and 35 mm film. Based in Kalgoorlie, Western Australia.

[**Gurans Photography**](http://welcome.to/gurans_photo) - Site in
Swedish and English featuring pictures from Sweden and USA in 4x5" and
35 mm. There is also some info on building largeformat cameras, making
camera bags and how to carry all your heavy camera equipment.

[**Gustavo Castilla Photography Web Site**](http://gcastilla.com) - The
site is a collection of my Images and resources

[**HABS/HAER Photos -
Oregon**](http://www.odot.state.or.us/eshtm/cult.htm) - Archival LF
recordation of historic bridges and architecture in Oregon, by James
Norman.

[**HP Designjet**](http://www.designjet.hp.com/supplies) - HP’s
Designjet Online website provides technical support and product
information for all Designjet large format printers and scanners and for
HP’s portfolio of large format media and ink. Tools include driver
downloads, user forums, compatibility charts, training videos, color
management advice, print profit calculator, and much more.

[**Hak's Photos**](http://haksphotos.com) - Look at some terrific
photographic art just perfect for your home,office or club. They are all
16x20 black and white artistic photos.

[**Hamish Reid's Pandemonia**](http://www.dnai.com/~hamish/) - driven by
the abstract shapes of domestic items, for example, or the found
surrealisms of everyday life. Many themes, among which urban,
industrial, desert landscapes of East SF bay area and California,
post-modern archaelogy, and people. MF and 4x5. Black-and-White and
color.

[**Home Build Camera**](http://home.wxs.nl/~hubrecht/home.html) -
Building a field-camera of beech an brass

[**Homepage Of Michele
Vacchiano**](http://www.geocities.com/SoHo/Studios/4340) - Wildlife
photography in the western Alps: a nature photographer's homepage

[**Howard Bond**](http://www.musicman.com/hb/hb.html) - known for
Black-and-White landscapes and abstracts (4x5 to 11x14), which are
enhanced using unsharp making. The site has a technical paper, a few
portfolios, workshop and book info.

[**Howard Slavitt**](http://www.naturelandscape.com) - Fine art nature
landscape photography.

[**Ian J. Plant Photography**](http://www.ipphotography.com) -
Distinctive Landscape Photography.

[**Ian Pereira --- Advertising And Industrial Photographer In
India**](http://www.ianpereira.com) - Still Life, Industrial, Food,
Jewellery, Interiors and Special Effect Photography

[**Images By Richard S. Ross**](http://home.earthlink.net/~rsross) -
Landscape photographs of the Desert Southwest and Sierra Nevada
Mountains

[**Images Of Enchantment**](http://www.imagesofenchantment.com) - Large
format and panoramic photography by Brian R. Vuillemenot celebrating the
geological, biological, and historic landscapes of New Mexico and the
southwest. 4X10, 4X5, and 6X17 formats.

[**Images: The Photography Of Michael
Morris**](http://webplaza.pt.lu/morris/) - I photograph nature,
architecture, people and abstracts images with a Linhof Technika and a
Mamiyaflex. My photography is about similarity and connection of all
images and I like both Fujichrome colour films and several black and
white films. I live in Luxembourg and have made images in several
countries in Europe (France, Monaco, Prague in the Czech Republic,
Slovakia, Poland, Belgium for example) but also in a few places in
America. Comments and suggestions welcome.

[**In The Swedish Tradition Of Ansel Adams**](http://www.staffan.net) -
A Swedish page dedicated to Ansel Adams. The page shows some Californian
and Swedish Black-and-White and color pictures and describes a way to
get "large format feel" when shooting 35 mm! A special technique to use
dark red filter over the lens when using Technical Pan film is
described. Some updated Stockholm art event shots are also here.

[**Instant Memories Wedding
Photography**](http://www.instantmemories.com) - Wherever your wedding,
Canada, California, Florida, Maryland, New York to Maui, an Instant
Memories wedding photographer will be there capturing your most
treasured moments from a photjournalstic and candid approach. Wedding
pricing from \$ 1600 and you keep the negatives! No travel charges in
the USA, Mexico, Canada and Hawaii.

[**Interior Images By Richard Johnson**](http://www.4by5.com) -
Interiors for Architects and Designers - Based in Toronto, Canada,
Richard specializes in mixed light architectural interiors.

[**Ivan Zucenko**](http://fly.to/IvanFoto) - MF - portrait protography,
LF - tabletops

[**J K Lawrence Photography**](http://www.jklawrencephoto.com) -
Architectural and Interiors Photography, Bozeman, MT

[**J Vee Carbon Prints**](http://www.jvee.com) - The remarkable Carbon
(watercolor pigment) print is explored. Each image begins as a large
format or ultra large format negative.

[**J. Shimon And J. Lindemann
Photography**](http://www.shimonlindemann.com) - Fine Art / Commercial
photographers from Manitowoc, Wisconsin. Uses Deardorf 8X10, 11X14, and
12X20 for platinum printing and other alternative processes.

[**JESUS COLL Fine Photography**](http://www.graficart.net/jesuscoll) -
Black-and-White and COLOR sites on this Catalan photographer , showing
works on the landscape, natural enviroments and more.

[**JOHN SARSGARD Photographs**](http://www.johnsarsgard.com) - My
commercial work is portraiture, specializing in minimalist large format
work, preferring to show people with one or more of their favorite
things. My photographic art includes manmade structures and nature, as
well as people I meet by chance in significant places like Grand Central
Terminal in New York. In addition to 4x5, I also work in 35mm and medium
format. I primarily shoot on location.

[**Jack Dykinga**](http://www.dykinga.com) - website of Pulitzer Prize
winning large format photographer

[**James Kay Photography**](http://www.jameskay.com/land.htm) - James
Kay specializes in landscape photography of western North America with
an emphasis on the Colorado Plateau in southern Utah. His fine-art
photographs may be ordered on-line.

[**James Kropp Photography**](http://www.Jimkphoto.com) - Fine art
Black-and-White and Color photographer originaly from Upstate NY.
Passion for scenic landscape and still life. Uses 4x5 and 8x10 cameras.
Relocating to Bel Air Maryland and will update web page periodicaly.

[**James Venis Photography**](http://www.jvenis.com) - Fine photographic
images in heirloom-quality black and white.

[**Janez Pelko, A Photographer From
Slovenia**](http://www.crosswinds.net/~janezpelko/) - LF experimental +
35mm famous rock stars in action

[**Jean-Philippe Poli Photographies**](http://www.jeanphilippepoli.com)
- Black-and-White and color photography Landscapes from Corsica and
travels. Use Tachihara 4x5 inch

[**Jeff White**](http://www.jeffsphotos.com/index1.htm) - various
subjects in color and Black-and-White

[**Jeffrey Green Photography**](http://jgreenphoto.com) - Online
portfolio of photographer Jeffrey Green. Specializing in architecture,
interiors, food, people. Based in Las Vegas Nevada.

[**Jeroen Bruggeman
Photography**](http://home.pscw.uva.nl/bruggeman/foto/) - Fine art
portraits and nudes on 5x7.

[**Jerry D. Greer Photography / Mountain Trail
Press**](http://www.mountaintrailpress.com) - A Photographer/publisher
specializing in large format landscape photography and featuring images
from the Southern Appalachian Mountain Region.

[**Jim Galante Studio New York City**](http://www.jimgalante.com) - 20
Years Commercial Advertising Experience. Beauty Glamour Nudes Fashion
Fine Art Still Life Product Digital Location Studio

[**Jimmy Mac Donald - Serene
Landscapes**](http://www.fine-art.com/joyxeh/index.html) - The fish are
a swiming and the bugs are a buzzing. Enter into his world - his images.
And when you leave do give your comments. Fine-art black and white
landscapes of the central Canadian arctic - come on up

[**Jochen Koehler**](http://www.lichtblicke.com) - Black-and-White
photography in 35mm, 4x5 and 8x10. Landscape, architecture, Guatemala

[**Joe Englander**](http://www.englander-workshops.com) - Color and
Black-and-White landscape photographer, workshop teacher. The site
contains galleries of photographs organized by workshop locations (US
and worldwide) as well as technical articles.

[**Joe's Photo Site**](http://www.multiboard.com/~joneil) -
Black-and-White photography of all types, - landscape, IR, and
astro-photography, using a Bender 4x5, a spped graphic, and a 4x5
astrograph.

[**Joel Meyerowitz**](http://www.joelmeyerowitz.com) - This site has a
selection of images and text from each of his eleven books, as well as
articles and interviews.

[**Joerg Frankenberger**](http://www.frankenberger.com) -
Black-and-White photographs in medium and large format

[**Joerg Steck Photography**](http://www.befindlichkeit.de) - dealing
with references, metaphors, symbols and allegories

[**John Dziadecki: Artist/Photographer**](http://dziadecki.tripod.com/)
- Straight and composite imagery. Black-and-White and color. Traditional
and digital.

[**John MacLean Photography - Santa Fe, New
Mexico**](http://www.johnmaclean.com) - Color and Black-and-White
Portfolio Image Galleries of Infrared, Costa Rica, Southwestern
Landscapes, Architecture, and People, for Advertising, Editorial, Fine
Art and Stock.

[**John Miranda Nature And Travel
Photography**](http://home.earthlink.net/~johnsmiranda/) - A collection
of 35mm, 6x7, and more recently 4x5 pictures. I am new to 4x5, but
enjoying immensely. I enjoy combining outdoor hiking and travel to
capture the surrounding beauty. I look forward to expanding this site as
my portoflio of 4x5 images increase.

[**John Nanian Photography**](http://www.nanianphoto.com) - Rhode Island
based large format photographer specializing in portraiture, documentary
and HABS / HAER Photography. He also makes cameraless photographs using
large format negatives he crafts by hand.

[**John Rehner - Still Light Fine Art
Photography**](http://www.stilllight.com) - Featuring Black-and-White
and color landscape imagery by John Rehner jr. from all over America.
Download our free screensaver.

[**John Sexton**](http://www.johnsexton.com/) - Black-and-White
landscape photographer and printer, workshop teacher, renowned for his
books Quiet Light and Listen to the Trees

[**Jon Paul Gallery**](http://www.jonpaulgallery.com) - This site
features the large format landscape photography of Lake Tahoe based
photographer Jon Paul. Jon uses 100% natural light in his work. While
specializing in Lake Tahoe imagery, you will also see images of
Yosemite, San Francisco, Arizona and the West.

[**Jon Roemer Photography**](http://www.jonroemer.com) - Portfolios of
Jon's commercial architecture and people photography and Jon's fine art
large format b+w landscape photography.

[**Jonathan's Photo Page**](http://www.netwood.net/usr/jonsmith/) - I
try to explore the beauty of ordinary scenes near me in the Los Angeles
area. I shoot 8x10 direct to print on Ilfochrome and try to shoot with
long shutter speeds to capture movement and mood.

[**Jordan Photographic**](http://www.jordanphoto.com) - Jordan
Photographic is self-promotional website also intended to be a useful
resource in Black-and-White fine art photography. Using a large format
view camera, Chris J. Jordan (Boston) constructs collage-like landscapes
of shape, object, and tone that resonate together on abstract and poetic
levels.

[**Joseph Alsko Photography**](http://alsko.netfirms.com) - Color
landscape photography primarily of central Europe - from 4x5 and 8x10
transparency film.

[**Joseph Holmes - Natural Light
Photography**](http://www.josephholmes.com) - Web portfolio of fine
color landscape photography of North America from the 34-year career of
Joseph Holmes. His three books include "Canyons of the Colorado" (1996)
and "Joseph Holmes - Natural Light" (1989).

[**Joseph Kayne Photography**](http://www.josephkaynephoto.com) - Large
Format Fine Art Color Landscape Photography. Images include the United
States natural landscape and rare Anasazi and Native American ancestral
dwellings, structures and rock art.

[**Julian Oliver Bell. Photography, Stuff And
Nonsense**](http://www.webstar.nl/~job/) - Naturally under continual
construction but so far camera pages with medium and large format
cameras, do-it-yourself ideas. a small gallery and of course stuff and
nonsense. Planned are darkroom and technique pages.

[**Juraj Lipscher Photography**](http://www.lipscher.ch) - Medium and
large format black and white photographs of life in Switzerland from
cradle to grave: Maternity wards, beauty parlours, gyms, civil defence
shelters, autopsy rooms, crematories and a fictive swiss village

[**Justin Black Photography**](http://www.justinblackphoto.com) - 4x5
and 35mm color landscapes from the Sierra Nevada, the California coast,
and destinations further afield. Justin Black is the manager and curator
of Galen Rowell's Mountain Light Gallery in Bishop, CA.

[**Justin Guariglia, Photographer Based In HONG KONG,
China**](http://www.guariglia.com) - Justin Guariglia is an award
winning photographer, based in HONG KONG, China, specializing in
advertising, corporate and editorial photography throughout the asia
pacific region.

[**Kamakura Print Collection**](http://www.kamprint.com) - Gravure
prints (photogravure) of Kamakura, Japan, and other views by Kamakura
artist/printmaker Peter Miller. The photographs were made with a Linhof
Master Technika 4X5. Positives, resist exposure, copperplate etching and
printing were all done in my workshop in Kamakura Japan. The site
includes Kamkakura temples and shrines, Seascapes, Lightscapes,
Snowscapes, Dreamscapes, Pathways, and information about the printmaking
process and my book Kamakura Views.

[**Ken Cravillion Photography**](http://www.kgcphoto.com) - Landscape
and nature images of the Midwest and West. Midwest emphasis on Upper
Michgigan and Wisconsin. West concentrates on Colorado soon to be
Glacier. Images taken with Canon EOS, Pentax 645NII, Shen-Hao 4x5
HZX-2A.

[**Ken Lee Gallery**](http://www.kenleegallery.com) - Beautiful large
format photographs in the classical tradition. Quadtone digital and
Platinum prints, with excellent technical info and links to helpful
resources.

[**Ken Rockwell**](http://www.kenrockwell.com) - La Jolla, California,
USA based site showcases California and the world. These vivid
colorscapes are direct scans from up to 4x5 and 6x12 camera originals.
Some are posted in resolutions up to 5,000 pixels or more per side: just
keep clicking on the images. Rumored full site roll-out expected
November 2000, but even today there are quite a few stunning images,
especially considering that many of the comps were only scanned with a
Mavica. Also coming are LF reviews and tips learned across decades of
practical world-traveling with a 4x5.

[**Kerry Thalmann**](http://www.thalmann.com/) - Large format images of
nature (two beautiful dozen as of sept 98) by a professional based in
Oregon who specializes in that type of photography.

[**Kim Weston Page**](http://www.kimweston.com/) - Grandson of Edward,
Son of Cole, living at Wildcat Hill and shooting studio nudes

[**King Wu - Photography**](http://welcome.to/kingwu) - Large and Medium
format photography of China and Pacific Northwest of America

[**Kirk D. Keyes Photography - Images Of The
Land**](http://www.keyesphoto.com) - Kirk D. Keyes Photography Images of
the Land specializes in color and black and white large format
landscape, nature, and scenic photographs. Subjects include Landscapes,
Slot Canyons, Aspens, and Waterfalls found in the Colorado Plateau and
the Southwest, the Rocky Mountains, and the Pacific Northwest.

[**Kirk Gittings Photography**](http://www.gittingsphoto.com) - The
website of Albuquerque photographer,Kirk Gittings. Kirk has spent 25
years photographing the landscape and architecture of the SW. His fine
art photography is in many museum and university collections while his
architectural photography regularly appears in national magazines and
books. He has taught large format topics at the University of New
Mexico, The Santa Fe Photographic Workshops, the View Camera Magazine
Workshops and has been a visiting artist at the School of the Art
Institute of Chicago for 5 summers. Signed books and info about upcoming
workshops are available from the website.

[**Landscape And Abstract Fine Art
Photography**](http://www.bobhudak.com) - Florida photographer BobHudak
offers an original collection of museum quality Black-and-White
photographs from around the country featuring landscapes and closeups of
abstract patterns in nature, shot on large format film with a Deardorff
and mounted as Silver Gelatin, Printing Out Paper, or Platinum/Palladium
prints.

[**Landscape Photography By Philip
Coman**](http://home.ica.net/~pcoman/west.htm) - Large format
photography of the American West, Canadian Prairies, Adirondack Park.
4x5, 5x7, and 8x10 cameras employed. All work by Philip Coman.
Exhibitions include Fox Talbot Museum, England, Art Gallery of Peel,
Laurier Gallery Canada.

[**Landscape Photography Of The Pacific
Northwest**](http://www.dalestrousephoto.com) - Large format black and
white images of the Pacific Northwest natural landscape. Also, urban
landscape images taken with 35mm, 6x7cm and 4x5.

[**Landscapes By Paul Lipscombe**](http://www.landskip.co.uk) -
Landscapes of War and Peace. A photographic survey of the landscape of
southern Belgium and northern France. This is a view of a contemporary
landscape recovering from the scars and heritage of the First World War.
There is an additional catalogue covering other projects by the
photographer, mostly in Britain. Most images made with a 5x7 Gandolfi, a
8x10 Tachihara, or a 5x4 Soho Reflex.

[**Landscapes Of Flanders And The Lowlands**](http://www.decreton.com) -
As a landscape photographer Jan Decreton is specialized in the lowlands,
"Le plat pays". He mainly uses large format media and has access to an
archive of Flemish and Walloon landscapes. Jan Decreton works as a photo
illustrator for publications, annual reports, calendars and books. He
worked on more than 25 books, among them the poetry and photo album with
Anton Van Wilderode : A townscape of Flanders and Flanders, a well-kept
secret.

[**Landscapes Of Wales By Steve Lewis
L.R.P.S.**](http://www.landscapesofwales.co.uk) - THE online gallery for
images of the Snowdonia National Park and North Wales.

[**Large Format Black And White
Environmental**](http://www.steve-sherman.com) - Large Format Black and
White Landscape, Urban and environmental work. Location workshops, zone
system, portrait / figure and darkroom. Printing services for discerning
photographers

[**Large Format Pictures Of Yellowstone
NP**](http://phy19.phy.tcd.ie/anselm/lfyello.html) - The page contains
pictures of my last visit to Yellowstone NP. Enlargment can be done for
a fee, just drop me a line for prices.

[**Large Format Photography**](http://www.oprit.rug.nl/otten/art.html) -
This site contains some technical information on large format
photography as well as experimental results of resolution tests with
various formats and cameras. Several pages of my photographs are
available.

[**Larger Format Photographer**](http://www.photobyrick.com) - I use a
Crown Graphics, but I purchased a Caltar 150 that is awesome.

[**Laurence J. Power**](http://www.photoimage.uk.com) - Landscape figure
and fashion photography. shot on all formats including 5 x 4

[**Lewis Kemper Photography**](http://www.LewisKemper.com) - Lewis
Kemper is a large format photographer specializing in the western
landscape. His images of details in nature have been used for calendars,
posters and books. He is a contributing editor to Outdoor Photographer
and a columnist to PC Photo magazines.

[**Lifetime@Artlife**](http://www2.gol.com/users/artlife/) - I am an
Japanese photographer. I am aiming to express in the new point of view.
primarily ussed digital cameras. always think about the subject for the
human heart and subconsciousness.

[**Light Mountain
Photography**](http://www.lightmountainphotography.com) - 4x5
Black-and-White and Ilfochrome, elegant nudes zany and tragic tableaux
inspiring portraits, Canadian landscapes,stunning flowers

[**Lumenetumbra Photography**](http://lumenetumbra.cjb.net) - A few
shots made with large format

[**Lux Fragilis Photography**](http://www.luxfragilis.com) - I'm a
landscape and architectural photographer currently based in Athens, OH.
I work in formats up through 8x10 and large format photography is a
consuming passion of mine. Take a look at my site, at my photos, and if
you feel like supporting my college education, buy a print. Good light
to all!

[**M. A. McMillan - Montana Landscapes**](http://www.mcmillanstudio.com)
- Explore the wonder of Montana through the landscapes made by master
photographer M. A. McMillan using the 4x5 format. View the gallery
section of web site.

[**MARCUS SCHWIER PHOTOGRAPHY**](http://www.marcus-schwier.de) -
Architecture, Landscape, Events. Worldwide. MF / LF up to 8" x 10" in
black and white and color. Exhibitions in Galleries and Museums.
Lectures. Experimentals with shifting Pinhole Cameras.

[**Mamut Photo**](http://www.mamutphoto.com) - A large format and
ultra-large format ressource page, with also a focus on alternative
printing processes

[**Marc Deneyer**](http://users.skynet.be/deneyer/) - Black and white
landscapes of Greenland, Egypt, Marocco, Scotland, France...

[**Marching Light Photography**](http://www.marchinglight.com) - Fine
Art Large Format Photography by Eric Sarti, Yosemite,Zion,Fall
Color,Dogwoods,Maples.

[**Marco Barsanti Photography**](http://www.marcobarsanti.com) - Large
Format, black and White landscapes and nudes gallery, biography and
contact information

[**Mark Cheadle Photography**](http://markcheadle.com) - In the personal
section of the web site you will find work done with the Pyro/Azo/Amidol
process. During other hours i shoot tabletop / product work. Founding
memeber of LFA, a LF collective located in Central Ohio.

[**Mark Citret**](http://mcitret.com) - The photographer of "Along the
way" reveals in subtle and personal black and white images the fleeting
beauty behind the ordinary. This site has interesting essays and
galleries.

[**Mark Howell**](http://www.markhowellphotographs.com) -
Black-and-White images: land and sea scapes; botanalia; walls and
buildings; abstracts and extracts.

[**Mark Lindsey Photography**](http://www.mark-lindsey.com) - fine art
b/w, portraiture, advertising photography

[**Mark Meyer Photography**](http://www.photo-mark.com) - Chicago-based
commercial photographer. Portfolios include natural landscapes, urban
landscapes, performing arts and still lifes.

[**Mark Surloff Photography Of Architecture**](http://www.surloff.com) -
Photography of Architecture, Interior Design and Fine Art

[**Marty Lowman**](http://martylowman.com) - Medium and large format
black and white landscape, and cityscape photography

[**Matt Needham Photography**](http://mattneedham.com) - My online
portfolio contains 35mm, medium format, and 4x5 photographs. I shoot 99%
BW, and develop and print in my home darkroom. In the past I have mainly
used LF for landscape, although I am beginning to do more 4x5 portrait
work.

[**McFarland's BandW Fine Art Landscapes**](http://www.mcfarlands.net) -
Sites shows 120, 4x5 and 5x7 Fine Art Black-and-White Landscape
Photography of mostly Upstate N.Y. Fingerlakes region. Most negatives
developed in PMK Pyro and prints using modified developer formulas. I
enjoy film, chemistry and processing using turn-of-the-century
technology. Most images are accompanied by a complete description of
film type and processing, exposure settings and printing information.

[**McLane Photography Inc.**](http://www.mclanephotography.com) - Fine
art photographer based in the southeastern Unites States. Specializing
in Large Format Landscape photography. Utilizes Ebony 4"x5" systems.

[**Metropolis Design Group LLC**](http://www.metropolisdg.com) -
In-house ability to provide Historic American Building Survey/Historic
American Engineering Record (HABS/HAER)documentary photography. Also
provides full historic preservation and architectural services.

[**Michael Colabello Photography**](http://www.colabellophoto.com) -
Large format, black and white and color images of New York State's
Adirondack Park. Also, Includes images taken in the western U.S. Great
images of waterfalls.

[**Michael E. Gordon Fine
Photography**](http://www.mgordonphotography.com) - Unique 4x5 color and
black white landscapes (mostly intimate) of California and Utah.

[**Michael Fatali - 8 X 10 Color Of American
West**](http://www.fatali.com/) - Utah based photographer shooting
antural scene out west

[**Michael J. Kravit Expressive Platinum
Photography**](http://www.mindspring.com/~mkravit/photo/mjkphoto.htm) -
Expressive platinum photography by award winning architect Michael J.
Kravit. These images include landscapes and architectural vignettes.

[**Michael Jordan - Silver Slate
Photography**](http://www.silverslatephotography.com) - Fine Art black
and white photography with focus on the East Texas area.

[**Michael Smith And Paula Chamlee**](http://WWW.michaelandpaula.com) -
the husband-and wife team is known for their exclusive use of contact
printing with older materials. the site has several articles, book
information, and will feature a gallery in the future.

[**Michele Vacchiano Photography**](http://www.geocities.com/mvacchiano)
- Landscape and nature photography in the western Alps. Michele
Vacchiano works either in small or in medium and large format. In
English and Italian (Homepage and Biography in German and French too).

[**Michiana In Black And
White**](http://www.christineallynnephotography.net) - Black and white
photographs of the Michiana region (Border region between Indiana and
Michigan near South Bend, IN) in large and meduim format film. Local
contributors welcome.

[**Mike Anderson Photography**](http://mikeandersonphotos.cjb.net) -
Based in Baltimore, aspiring local band, portrait, landscape and macro
photographer Mike Anderson displays his work on his personal website
here. Give it a look, you'll be surprised of the quality and maturity
from such a young photographer.

[**Mike Butler Architectural Photography**](http://www.mike-butler.com)
- An online portfolio of my current interior and architecture
photography. The use of dramatic lighting, gels and dawn shots creates
some very fun images of maybe some not so fun places. There is also some
large format product photography done for designers, chairs etc...

[**Mohawk
Photographer**](http://www.geocities.com/SoHo/Coffeehouse/3937/index.html)
- Native American black and white portrait photography. Links to other
Native artists. More 4X5 images to appear.

[**Monochrome Fine Art By Mike
Arato**](http://www.photographicartworks.com) - Black and White Large
Format Photography

[**Morali Fine Landscape Photography**](http://www.willi-morali.de) -
Fine Art Black and White Landscape of Germany

[**Morrell Photoworks**](http://www.morrellphotoworks.com) - Better
Living through Photography ! Large Format Photography done digitally.
Charles Morrell High Altitude Photographer, lives in America's highest
Town ... and shoots the High Desert and Wild West of America.

[**Mountain Photography**](http://www.mountain-photography.net) -
Website of Alex Milne dedicated to all thoose that commune in the
mountains

[**Mystery Author Mark
Coggins**](http://www.immortalgame.com/photographs/index.html) - 4x5
galleries from Mark Coggins, author of THE IMMORTAL GAME and VULTURE
CAPITAL. Includes chapter illustrations from both books and
Black-and-White landscape, portrait and still life.

[**Nadir Magazine, Fotografia Sul Web**](http://www.nadir.it) - The
richest on-line magazine for photographers in Italy, established by Rino
Giardiello. Large format pages are edited by Michele Vacchiano.

[**Natural Images Photography**](http://naturalimages.com) - Nature and
commercial photographer based in So Cal. USA. Landscape images of
California, including Death Valley, Mono Lake and Yosemite.

[**Natural Order Photography - Images By Scott
Bacon**](http://www.naturalorderphoto.com) - Landscape, nature and
travel photography for fine art and commercial stock applications. Wide
variety of locations - U.S., Canada, Mexico, Italy, and New Zealand.

[**Nature - Images Of Gaia**](http://www.garydwhalen.com) - Images in
both 4 x 5 and 35mm. Shots of nature and earth. Images to help humans
realize that the magnificence of nature will always surpass the
accomplishments of man.

[**Nature Images. Bill Atkinson.**](http://www.natureimages.com) - A
gallery of a couple hundreds of color nature images (mostly shot in 6x6
in) of the US and flower close-ups. Beautiful elements of design are
isolated with an abstract quality. Bill is also a master digital
printer.

[**New York Yacht Club - 1901 - Warren And Wetmore
Architects**](http://mysite.verizon.net/vze3bss6/) - These are color
interiors photographs created in 1999 onto 4x5in film (Kodak's 64T and
Fuji's NPL) using a specially-modified 1972 Deardorff Special camera and
current Schneider Super Angulon lenses (58mm, 72mm, 90mm, and 120mm
focal lengths). This mid-town Manhattan Club was the long-time defender
of yachting's America's Cup trophy: one of the Club's commodores, an
obscure and unknown financier named J. P. Morgan, spoke of his passion
for yachting when he remarked "if you have to ask how much it costs, you
can't afford it."

[**Nick Stergiopoulos Photography**](http://www.geocities.com/njsphoto)
- Images of landscapes and cityscapes in the West (based in Salt Lake
City) and the Midwest (based in Cincinnati). Images are 4x5 and 35mm
with new images primarily large format.

[**Painted-With-Light.com**](http://www.painted-with-light.com/) - 4x5
landscape photography primarly California and the American Southweast.
Specializing in seascapes.

[**Panoramic And Large Format
Landscapes**](http://stsulser.virtualave.net) - Panoramic and Large
Format pictures mainly from the US Southwest/Northwest.

[**Patrick Linehan Photography**](http://patricklinehan.com) - A fine
art Black-and-White photographer specializing in architectural and
landscape photography.

[**Paul Anthony**](http://silverprintgallery.com) - Urban Landscapes,
Large format photographs of Queens County New York.

[**Paul Butzi Photograpy**](http://www.butzi.net) - Several galleries of
images, including Black-and-White landscape and still life images made
with large format. Also equipment reviews and articles on VC printing
and VC papers, articles on basic darkroom technique, theater
photography, etc.

[**Paul Raphaelson's Fine Art Photography
Site**](http://www.paulraphaelson.com) - Black and White Urban Landscape
photography, works in progress, gallery info, small edition prints.

[**Paul Schilliger Photography**](http://www.paulschilliger.com) -
Images of nature, intimate landscapes, in the Swiss Alps and beyond.

[**Peter Ewing - Photographer**](http://icenet.com.au/~petere/) -
Monochrome photographs of Australian national parks and wilderness where
man's imprint has been minimal.

[**Peter Gowland**](http://www.petergowland.com) - Famous glamour
photographer. Site includes examples of his recent work as well as his
photos from the past going back to the 40's. It's an interesting visual
timeline. Nudes and personal work also included in addition to a section
that shows and describes the cameras he makes including his 8x10 twin
lens.

[**Peter Vanderwarker Photographs**](http://www.vanderwarker.com) -
Professional architectural photography

[**Phil Kember**](http://www.deathvalleyphoto.com) - Large format (8x10)
images of Death Valley National Park, both color and Black and White.

[**Phil Malpas Photography**](http://www.philmalpas.com) - The home of
Phil Malpas photography. Phil has travelled widely throughout Europe and
the UK and recent visits to the USA have provided some spectacular
subject matter. Shot on a large format camera, meticulously constructed
and beautifully printed, his images have a clarity and retention of
detail so befitting the subjects' natural design and architecture.
Phil's work has been exhibited nationally, including significant
exhibitions at Christies and The Mall Galleries in London. His work has
been recognised by a number of awards including "Best Landscape" and
"Print of the Year" at a recent event in Fueterventura.

[**Philip J. McCourt**](http://www.philsan.com) - I built an 8x10
monorail large format camera from scratch. I explain some of the
contruction details and the problems I had to solve. The 8x10 is used to
capture images of landscapes around Cleveland and Ohio.

[**Philippe Ayral Photography**](http://perso.club-internet.fr/payral) -
Platinum/Palladium and Azo prints. Mostly 5x7 and 8x10.

[**Philippe Buraud, Still-life, Black And White Contemporary
Photography**](http://philippe.buraud.free.fr) - Large format
photography, black and white fine art Animal and mineral inspirations.
Life and dead of the things.

[**Photographers-Darkroom.Com**](http://www.photographers-darkroom.com)
- A site featuring information on the processes, materials and goals of
the photographic darkroom technician. Film development
times/temperatures, developer formulas and other misc. darkroom
information.

[**Photographic Essay**](http://www.rhinn.com/studio.html) - Some still
life color photographies made with a MPP 4x5 field camera. The whole
site shows 300 photos on different subjects.

[**Photographien Dr. Lars Hennings**](http://www.photographien.org) -
There are shown images made by LF and MF, AND there is a book teaching
LF (PDF, in German): Photoschule Großformat, you find it too at
wikibook, where one can edit it: http://wikibook.org

[**Photographs By Bob Kolb**](http://www.kolbphoto.com) - Large format
fine art black and white photographs by Bob Kolb

[**Photographs By David Styffe**](http://www.davidstyffe.com) - Black
and white photographs of the natural and unnatural landscape -- some
humorous.

[**Photographs From Weeping Ash**](http://www.weepingash.co.uk) - A
collection of pictures, old and new, from a lifetime spent immersed in
photography and photographic imagery. Also, details of Creative Camera
Magazine, The Cambridge Darkroom, and some notable English
Photographers.

[**Photographs Of The Canadian Pacific
Northwest**](http://www2.yellowhead16.net/~kknoll) - Various Photos from
British Columbia. Taken with Canon F1, Leica iiif, Pentax 645,
Hasselblad 500cm, Linhof Technika, Canos A2e

[**Photography**](http://www.planetkc.com/sradom) - Large format, (4X5)
black and white landscape photographic site. This is combined with
personal/family stuff. Site under construction and more photo's will be
added ASAP. Stop by and enjoy great photographs and interesting links,
etc.

[**Photography By David Houlder. Landscapes, Cycling, Walking,
Macro,...**](http://www.davidhoulder.com) - Black and white large format
images of Australia and other galleries of smaller format colour work.
There's an info section as well with a couple of tips on using and
processing large format film, plus links to various imaging resources.

[**Photography By James Randklev**](http://www.JamesRandklev.com) -
Image rich website featuring the work of James Randklev, voted one of
the world's top landscape photographers. Over 30 years shooting large
format nature photography. One of the Sierra Club's most published
photographers. With 12 books and over 145 exclusive calendars featuring
his stunning work, Randklev has included over a thousand of his finest
images on this searchable website. Included also is his greatest fine
art images spanning his career under the portfolio catagory titled:
Intimate Landscapes where this select group of images can be ordered as
fine art prints produced by West Coast Imaging, Inc. His award winning
photography can be seen in numerous books, magazines, calendars, print
ads and fine art collections. Select work is also represented by
GettyImages.com.

[**Photography By Stan McQueen**](http://www.smcqueen.com) - Large
format nature, outdoor, and landscape photography.

[**Photos And Short Story**](http://www.arraich.com) - Photos head each
page from page two on. All were taken with a 4x5 view camera and are
black and white. They are abstract, but are straight prints, not
darkroom manipulations.I also use an 8x10 but didn't use those pictures
on the site. Tech details:Plus-x film;HC110 dev. Ilford Gallery paper;
lens is usually 240mm Rodenstock. Photos in the FreePhotos section were
mostly 35mm so don't look.

[**Photos By Rick Ellis**](http://www.fnet.net/~ellis/photo/) - Outdoor
large format photography.

[**Pictures By Bonnevier**](http://www.bonnevier.nu/) - Hans L Bonnevier
Catching the Nordic light in Large Format

[**Plateau Light Photography**](http://www.plateaulight.com) - Large
format (4x5 and 5x7) images of The Southwest on Supergloss materials.
Visit our gallery @ Zion National Park in Utah.

[**Platinum Visions - Fine Art Platinum Prints By Allan
King**](http://platinumvisions.com) - Canadian photographer Allan King
uses large format platinum, palladium and platinum/palladium prints to
explore and interpret nature's lightforms, landscapes and issues of man,
the world he creates and the environment he changes. His limited edition
12"X20" platinum photographs can be found in galleries, public and
private collections, and in exhibitions locally and internationally.

[**Polaroid 20x24 Studio West**](http://www.mammothcamera.com) -
www.mammothcamera.com Tracy Storers' site for information and renting
the Polaroid 20x24 camera/studio western US.

[**Professional Photography By Tommy
Wilson**](http://www.photographybytommywilson.com) - A Kentucky based
full service studio. We offer 20 years experience photographing
weddings, families, commercial, etc. We have photographed over 500
weddings and will gladly provide references upon request. We look at
weddings from the bride's point of view, not only do we capture the day
but the emotions associated with it! We create unique albums that will
quickly become cherished family heirlooms. Conatact us today for mor
info.

[**QuantzGallery.com**](http://www.quantzgallery.com) - Large Format
Black and White Landscape images with a messageboard serving as an open
forum on photography.

[**R. A. Zeichner - Fine Art Photography**](http://www.razeichner.com) -
Four galleries of limited edition fine art black and white photography
including images from death valley, the finger lakes region and a unique
portfolio of contemporary civil war images.

[**RADIM SULC PHOTOGRAPHY**](http://www.sulc.com) - Professional
architectural, landscape and travel photography

[**RW Hawkins Photography**](http://www.rwhawkins.com) - RW focuses his
4x5 on scenes across the western United States. His website offers
prints for sale as well as rights to use. In addition, he offers advice
on using digital technology (with a focus on Linux) in combination with
"classic" techniques.

[**Rainer Schoditsch Architekturfotografie**](http://www.schoditsch.com)
- Architectural and stock photography. Austria, Hungary, Europe.

[**Ralph Hinterkeuser Fotografie**](http://www.hinterkeuser.de) - Free
"documentary style" colour photography as well as commercial work about
arts and architecture. Follow "Fotokunst" to a set of pictures taken in
Lille in northern France as it is being shifted from a 19th century town
into a 21st century nowhere-land (high quality exhibition catalogue
available with 25 full page colour illustrations and texts in English,
French, German).

[**Raven Visionary Arts**](http://www.ravenvision.com) - Fine-art
photography by Peter Hughes, Kira Corser, Denise Sallee and Robin
Rosenzweig. Large format nude; color landscape; portrait; Polaroid and
alternative processes. Plus writingfiction, essays, opinion, etc.

[**Red Desert Ltd., Photography Services, Hong Kong,
China.**](http://www.red-desert.com.hk) - Architectural, portrait,
editorial, corporate and advertising photography. Hong Kong and Asia
Pacific region.

[**Red Hill Photography**](http://www.redhillphoto.com) - A site for
those interested in large-format photography with online portfolios of
our work, links and resources.

[**Red Square Architectural Photography**](http://redsquarephoto.com) -
US-based photographer shoots architecture and design of commercial,
residential and industrial interiors. Works worldwide.

[**Rene Bolduc Large Format Photography**](http://www.renebolduc.com) -
Black and white large format photography (4x5 and 8x10) of Quebec's
Eastern Townships, France and Italy.

[**Renze Dijkema**](http://www.renzedijkema.nl) - art photography, macro
stillife, dutch artist, collage

[**Richard Johnson | Interior Images**](http://www.interiorimages.ca) -
Located in Toronto, Canada. All types of Interiors, Architecture and
Panorama 360. View camera and film shooting with Rodenstock lenses. (35,
45, 55, 65, 75, 90, 115, 150, 210mm focal lengths) Imacon scanning. US
and Canadian Citizen.

[**Richard Warren Photographs**](http://www.richardwarrenphoto.com) -
8x10 Format with Brass lens and Pyro PMK developer. Figures,Flora and
Fauna- from a New York City Fashion photographer.

[**Rizwan Dar's Photography**](http://rizwanportfolio.tripod.com/) -
Pictures of people from around the world, Toronto Street life and city
sky lines, Neon Signs, Portraits.

[**Rob Gray**](http://www.robgray.com/) - many superb Black and White
landscape photographs of Australia. technical info and essays on
photography and bushwalking, and an impressive truck.

[**Rob Karosis Photography**](http://www.robkarosis.com) - Both large
format landscapes and architectural/interior design photos.

[**Robert Domm Photography**](http://www.rdommphoto.com) - Large format,
fine art images of nature along with 35mm wildlife and close-up work.

[**Robert Ellis**](http://www.robertellis.com) - Large format
photography - abstractions of the landscape in color, Black-and-White
figure photographs (medium format), workshops and a bit more...

[**Robert Feinman Landscapes And Panoramas**](http://robertdfeinman.com)
- A selection of landscapes, cityscapes and panoramas. Places include
New York City, Chicago, San Francisco and Main Street USA. Large format
pictures of western scenes. Also a selection of Photoshop tips of
interest to photographers.

[**Robert Hansen**](http://www.roberthansen.com) - Over the last 25
years, working as a fine art photographer, Robert has produced 5
distinct portfolios. His work in color and black and white has been
produced mainly through the usage of both 4x5 and 8x10 large format view
cameras. His latest project involves photographing the Mayan ruin sites,
churches and people of the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico.

[**Robert Holcomb Photography**](http://www.rholcombphoto.com) - Images
of quiet, solitude and serenity. Black/White and Color. In all sizes, to
order in open and limited editions.

[**Robert J. Wood |
Homepage**](http://www.robertjwood.net/photography.shtml) - Gallery of
4x5 / 35mm photographs, equipment reviews, links, and more. Robert is a
Musicology grad student at CUNY in New York City.

[**Robert Jones Photography**](http://www.rjonesphotography.com/) -
Large format landscape, nature and travel photography with emphasis on
the American Southwest.

[**Robert Thompson**](http://RThompson.imageculture.com) - Black and
white fine art images using medium (6X7) and large (4X5) cameras.

[**Roberto
Tolin-Fotografia**](http://teleline.terra.es/personal/rtolin/) -
Commercial photographer from Gijon-Spain.Large format images from the
Atlantic coast. Also aerial, architectural and underwater photography.

[**Rolfe Horn - F45 Gallery**](http://f45.com/) - Many black and white
images. classical landscapes of the American West, as well as cityscapes
in the romantic/surrealistic tradition of Micheal Kenna.

[**Ross Martin Images - Fine Art Landscape
Photography**](http://www.rossmartinimages.com) - Ross Martin produces
inspired and unique images that celebrate the majesty and wonder of
creation. Shooting 4x5 color transparency exclusively, Ross finds
compelling compositions that evoke an emotional response in the viewer
and give a glimpse of the glory and artistry of the Creator.

[**Roy Parish**](http://ulm.edu/pharmacy/parish) - Faculty web site (The
University of Louisiana at Monroe), with gallery page of photographs,
mostly large format silver and platinum-palladium prints.

[**Rudolph Mittelmann**](http://www.geocities.com/SoHo/Suite/7013/foto)
- website of photographer who has built his own 18 X 24 cm camera and
done stereo work as well.

[**Sandy Sorlien Photographs**](http://sandysorlien.com/) - My work is
about places that have been disappearing from America: distressed
downtowns, urban neighborhoods, rural houses, and open country. Current
project: Main Streets photographed in color with a 6x9 view camera. Site
also includes three other book projects, Fifty Houses (35mm infrared
with shift lenses) Imagining Antarctica (Holga toy camera), and Manayunk
(Holga toy camera), as well as samples of my writing and a page about my
Art Car.

[**Scenic Wild Wildreness Photography**](http://scenicwild.com) - Large
and medium format images from America's wild places.

[**Scott Bacon Photography**](http://www.baconphoto.com) - Landscape,
nature and travel photography. Images from a wide variety of locations -
Colorado (home), all over the U.S., Canada, Mexico, Europe, and New
Zealand. Detailed travelogues \~ from short weekend trips to longer
excursions including a 7 week tour of Europe by train. Extensive
backcountry and travel experience.

[**Scott Jones Photography - Black And White Fine-art, Large-format
Images**](http://www.ScottJonesPhoto.com) - Black and white fine-art
photography covering a variety of subjects from meditations on death and
impermanence, to artistic images of steam trains and machinery.
Landscape work in Death Valley to mutli-media photo and text
constructions dealing with environmental propaganda and
counter-propaganda. Come have a visit!

[**Scott Squires Nature Photography**](http://www.scottsquires.com) -
Landscape Images using a 4x5 and Panoramic Images using a 6x17. Both
Color and Black and White.

[**Sean Dowie Photography**](http://www.smdphotography.com) - Florida
based Photographer specializing in large format.Scenic, Nature,
Lifestyles, Fine Art. If you ever been to the Eastcoast you'll enjoy
this site.

[**Sherman Dunnam**](http://www.dunnamphoto.com) - Large format
photography. Mostly black and white and mostly landscape or nature.

[**Silvio Maraini - Photographs**](http://www.maraini.com) - Large
format (8x10") Black-and-White landscape photography, medium format
portraiture.

[**Sons Of The Desert--Images Of The Southwest By Jeffrey
Wong**](http://www.angelfire.com/nv/wongnumber) - A mix of 35mm, 6x6,
and 4x5 color photographic images of Southwest Landscapes (for now).
Comments invited.

[**South Yuba River And Sierra Nevada
Range**](http://www.directcon.net/drkayak/) - Color images of Unique
rock patterns found on the South Yuba River in Northern California. All
Were taken with a Zone VI 4x5 and Fuji Velva by Charles Mackey.

[**Southern Appalachian Landscape By Jerry
Greer**](http://www.jerrygreerphotography.com) - Large format landscape
photography featuring the Southern Appalachian Mountains. Also, the home
of Mountain Trail Press, publisher of books, calendars and fine art
posters featuring the Southern Highlands.

[**Spectrum Photographic Inc**](http://www.spectrumphoto.com/) - I'm a
darkroom specialist with a love for the outdoors, when I get there !
There are few processes unknown to me and hands on is my "style" . I
custom print all of my images from 5X7 to 16X20 by hand in both
Black-and-White and RA-4. Also I'm a member of the W.F.P.A. as well as
being a full time professional photographer.

[**Stephen Johnson**](http://www.best.com/~sjphoto/) - The photographer
of "At Mono Lake" and "The Great Central Valley: California's Heartland"
has undertaken digital photography in 4x5. He is in the process of
photographing all the national parks digitally, and many of these
landscape photographs are on the site, among plenty of other
informative.

[**Stephen Weaver - Earth Systems
Imaging**](http://www.earthsystemsimaging.com) - Large format color
landscape images from North America with an emphasis on mountain
environments and geoscience stock photography

[**Steve Anchell**](http://anchellworkshops.com) - Large format fine art
photographer specializing in people and architecture since 1970. Author
of The Darkroom Cookbook, The Film Developing Cookbook, and The Variable
Contrast Printing Manual. Former editor of Photovision magazine. Large
format workshops in Southern Colorado, Montana, and Austria.

[**Steven Nestler Photographs**](http://stevennestler.com) - A gallery
of expressive landscapes rendered in silver by one of America's classic
photographers

[**Studies In Black And White Fine Art
Photography**](http://www.studiesinblackandwhite.com) - A site for
people who have seen my work at galleries and art fairs. Mediteraean
Architecture and High key Flowers. All images from 4x5 negs.

[**Studio Comercial Photography, Weddings And Portrait, 3D Object And
Panoramic Photography**](http://www.studiofoto.ro) - Profesional studio
images, comercial and advertising most taken on large and medium format
film. Also, a lot of studio wedding photography, virtual 3D objects and
panoramic photography made in digital format. This foto studio is
located in bucharest, romania and is looking forward permanently for a
high quality and creative images.

[**Susan Kopecky \~ Fine Art Photography**](http://www.susankopecky.com)
- Online Photography Gallery featuring works by emerging artist Susan
Kopecky. Black and White, limited edition prints for sale. Subjects
include landscapes, still lifes, and abstract images.

[**Sven Seiffert**](http://www.svenseiffert.com) - Large and medium
format portraits.

[**TB Studios(Tarek El Baradie)**](http://www.tbstudios.com) - Egyptian
photographer. My site is still under construction and hopefully by the
end of July will be completed.

[**TODD WIERSUM PHOTOGRAPHY**](http://OUTDOORPHOTOGRAPHY.NET) - LARGE
FORMAT FINE ART IMAGES OF THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST.

[**TV Cameraman**](http://www.steve-ilston.co.uk) - TV Cameraman trying
to make large format photography,pay.

[**Tarek El Baradie Web Site**](http://www.baradie.com/) - Still life
photographer from Cairo, Egypt. Specialising in interiors, hotels, food,
and products. I use medium and large format in my work. This site here
was created and uploaded as a trial and will be updated with loads of my
work soon. Interested in information exchange with all who are
interested in photo techniques.

[**Ted Orland's Page**](http://members.cruzio.com/~tno/) - Teacher,
commedian, philosopher and former assistant to Ansel Adams

[**Temple Monograph**](http://www.templemonograf.freeuk.com) -
man-altered landscapes and urban exteriors in the vein of Robert Adams,
Lewis Baltz, Atget etc. unusual concept of temples.

[**Teri Ann Wakeman**](http://www.cruzers.com/~twakeman) - website of
photographer who appreciates Land Rovers, British motorcycles and Wisner
Cameras

[**Terry D. Lee Fine Art Photography**](http://www.tleephotography.com)
- Atlanta Georgia based Fine Art Photographer who works in
Black-and-White and Color, featuring Landscape, Still Life and
Portraiture work in Large (8x10 and 4x5), Medium, and 35mm Formats.
Portraiture available in both Silver Gelatin and in Platinum.

[**Terry Donnelly And Mary Liz Austin**](http://Donnelly-Austin.com) -
Large format nature and landscape images from North America and the
World

[**The American Highway Project, Inc.**](http://www.highwayproject.org)
- Photographic documentation of America's vanishing two-lane highway
system.

[**The Dye Sublimation Archive**](http://www.ethansprague.com) - A
Polaroid Gallery- Images made on a 8x10 camera

[**The Gallery At The Solitary
Arc**](http://www.d332.com/gallery/photography) - Samples of 8x10
Black-and-White Photographs, primarily of portraiture. Description of my
journey in resuscitating the Linhof KolorKardan back into being.

[**The Tucker Pages**](http://www.i-55.com/~ptucker) - Black-and-White,
large format

[**The Photography Of Joachim Knill**](http://www.joachimknill.com/) - A
HOME MADE ! portable 20 X 30 Polaroid camera?!?! Like Mr. Ripley used to
say, "Believe it or Not"

[**Thomas Lingner/The Able Lens**](http://www.theablelens.com) -
Specializing in architectural photography.

[**Tillman Crane Photography**](http://www.tillmancrane.com) - Tillman
Crane is noted for his stunning architectural photographs printed in
silver and platinum/palladium. His first book, Tillman Crane/STRUCTURE,
published in March 2001 is a collection of many of his favorite works.

[**Tisdale Studio**](http://www.apwd.com/tisdalestudio) - The site is
the cutting edge photographic and mutli-disciplinary work of artist
Danny Tisdale. He has been creating work in the field for the last 15
years, from Africa to America. In the 21st century his work continues to
set a new standard for image making in the USA and the internationally.

[**Todd Caudle's Visions Of The West**](http://www.toddcaudle.com) -
Large- and medium-format color images of Colorado and the West (an
occasional Eastern location, too!).

[**Todd Korol Photographer**](http://www.toddkorol.com) - Canadian
editorial photographer living in the Canadian West. Photos featured are
from 4x5 to home made cameras. Photos are from around the world, both
personal and assignments featured.

[**Tommy Edwards**](http://www.tommyedwards.com) - Seattle photographer
specializing in large format photography.

[**Toronto Ontario
Photographers**](http://communities.msn.ca/TorontoOntarioPhotographers)
- Toronto Ontario Photographers from Toronto, Canada.

[**Tranquility Base Productions**](http://www.TranquilityImages.Com) -
Fine art black and white landscape photography of the California Sierra
Nevada mountains, rivers, streams and forests. Large format photography
by Craig Wells of Stockton California. Online ordering available. Stop
by and enter into a realm of black and white tonality and contrast,
shape and form, where light meets shadow, images beyond the norm.

[**Unblinking Eye**](http://unblinkingeye.com) - Articles on advanced
darkroom techniques: developoment by inspection, pyro development, Azo,
amidol developers, enlarged negatives by reversal, ultraviolet light
sources, vitamin C developers, Harvey's 777, pinhole photography,
Pyrocat-HD, Vandyke Brown printing, and much more.

[**Unspoken Dialogues**](http://www.ehjohnson.com) - Black and White
images from Brazil, India, Nepal, Oman and Thailand. A sampling of the
thousand of images that have been collected and exhibited nationally and
internationally.

[**Utopmania Est.2001 PHOTOGRAPHY DESIGN**](http://www.utopmania.tk) - |
PHOTOGRAPHY | DESIGN | WEB-CONCEPTS | Analogue Medium/Large-Format
Photography hand in hand with design-elements. Based in Germany.

[**V-Images**](http://valenzuela-images.com) - My web site both
commercial and non-comercial large format work.

[**Very Large Format Pans And
Banquets**](http://hometown.aol.com/citypan/citypan.html) - One of two
traditional banquet photogs left in U.S.-also builder and user of
Yanulpan "Delineater" very large format swing-lens panoramic cameras.
10x20 and 12x20" negs. 800+ images of downtown Chicago 1985-91. Take a
look...

[**Victor Korchenko**](http://www.bigfoot.com/~korchenko) -
Blackandwhite photographs taken mostly with old wooden large format
cameras. 5 online albums: Trees, Night, Still Life, Necropolis, Water.
Shot mostly in Caucasus mountains, Southern Russia.

[**Victor Korchenko Photography**](http://www.korchenko.com/art/) -
Landscapes, animals, still life, cemeteries.

[**Walter Beckham | Fine Art
Photography**](http://www.walterbeckham.com) - This site serves as an
on-line gallery of my work. The photographs are grouped by theme: The
Magolia Cemetery, Landscapes, Cityscapes, Urban Views, Rural Views, A
Portrait Series, Botanicals and Nudes. My pictures are generally of
commonplace things. I enjoy the super reality of this medium and try to
evoke a sense of mystery in my images. The photographs are chloride
contact prints in sizes ranging from 4x5 to 8x20. I use a 1951 Deardorff
8x10 and a 1930 Korona Banquet Camrera.

[**Walter Dufresne, Architectural And Interiors Photographer, Brooklyn,
New York**](http://walterdufresnephotographer.com) - This is the home
page, including contact information and rates, for a Brooklyn-based
architectural and interiors photographer who has photographed several
dozen historic preservation and restoration projects in and around New
York City.

[**Wayne Carlson Architectural
Photography**](http://www.localaccess.com/wcphoto/) - Architectural
photographs as well as some others that may be of interest.

[**Welcome To Alogenuri Zone**](http://www.alogenurizone.net) -
Fine\_art Black-and-White Alpine landscape in northern Italy.
Photographs and love about nature and many more. Italian only \[only
text\]

[**Westcorkprints By Luca Paradisi -
Ireland**](http://www.westcorkprints.com) - Black-and-White and colour
images celebrating the sheer beauty of South West of Ireland. Equipment
used Ebony 4x5 and Noblex for panoramics.

[**Wide Awake Photography**](http://www.wideawakephoto.com) - Black and
White images by award winning photographer Paul Mongillo. Paul works in
large format, 645 and 35mm. Subjects include landscapes, manmade objects
and people.

[**Wilburs Hole In The Ground**](http://www.execpc.com/~jstream) - Enter
my gallery to see travel, portraits, landscapes, scenics, and nature in
formats from 35mm to 4x5. Wisconsin based photography.

[**William Corey**](http://www.williamcorey.com) - For the past twenty
years I have spent three to four months of each year photographing the
Gardens of Japan with an 8 X 10 and 8 X 20. My concern has not been to
merely document the rich, cultural heritage that these gardens
represent, but to pursue the inner, hidden reality, the very essence of
beauty that embraces the symbolic and sacred realm of the gardeners art
- to create a distinctive and original artistic expression.

[**William J. Weber.Photographic
Images**](http://members.tripod.com/~wjw2/index.html) - William J. Weber
photographic images of Sicily and other parts of Europe in black and
white using 4x5 and 8x18 large format cameras.

[**William Levitt / Xpose2 /
Light-Zone**](http://home.arcor-online.de/william.levitt/) - Large
Format (and yes, medium format as well) photography.

[**William McEwen - Portrait
Photographer**](http://www.flash.net/~wmcewen) - William McEwen uses an
8x10 view camera to photograph individuals from the fields of politics,
entertainment and the arts. His photographs have been exhibited
throughout the United States, are in several public collections, and
have been published internationally. His web site includes a portrait
gallery, technical information, and more.

[**William Neill Photography**](http://www.WilliamNeill.com/) -
portfolios from "Yosemite, the promise of wilderness" and "Landscapes of
the spirit". color landscape photos of North America emphasizing
abstract patterns and textures, outstanding in their emotional clarity.

[**William Rehm Photography**](http://www.rehmphotography.com) -
Traditional West Coast Fine Art Black and White Photography

[**William Sadovsky**](http://williamsadovsky.com) - Large format black
and white photography of Michigan and Ontario, Canada. Beautiful images
with surrealistic undertones.

[**Wolfgang Sulzer Photography**](http://www.wolfgangsulzer.com) - 4x5
large format photography in black and white by Austrian photographer
Wolfgang Sulzer. Mainly arquitecture and landscapes of Austria, Brazil
and USA.

[**World Field Photographers Association**](http://www.johndesq.com/) -
semi-commercial site with some info (technical and general), photos,
form to join the Association. also field cameras specs and retail for
Europe.

[**Wynn White Photography**](http://www.wynnwhitephoto.com/) - Black and
white images by an American photographer living in Japan with
descriptions of darkroom processes, formulas, and materials. Primary
camera used is the Ebony 4x5.

[**Yishay Garbasz Photography**](http://www.yishay.com) - 8x10 and 4x5
large format photography

[**A 4x5 In Las Vegas**](http://www.expertphoto.com) - This is a
collection of high res photos taken in and around Las Vegas with a
Linhof 4x5. They are gorgeous !!

[**Archimage**](http://www.arch-image.org) - The vanishing architecture
of Russia and elsewhere. I like spending time with forgotten and dying
buildings; it seems sad that these grand structures had the fortitute to
withstand a century of war and catastrophe, but are now being quietly
finished off by complete neglect. This site has some historical data as
well. Most of the large format work is with a special 'monocle' lens.
35mm and large format.

[**Chris Jordan Photography**](http://www.chrisjordanphoto.com) -
Unexpectedly complex and beautiful color pallettes in a variety of urban
and natural settings.

[**F32 Large Format Photography**](http://www.f32.net/) - From
Silver...... to Silicon. f32 - a site dedicated to large format
photography, the use of traditional film, alternative processes and
digital representation Access to experienced large format photographers,
Large format prints and trannies for sale, Galleries, Free marketing
during our startup phase, Mailing lists, EMail addresses and discussion
areas.

[**Fabian Da Costa
Photographe**](http://perso.wanadoo.fr/fabian.da.costa) - Black and
white ,colour, landscapes , france, alpes books, wokshops,

[**Fine Print Photography**](http://www.zonesystem.de) - The intense
occupation with black-and-white photography revealed me a great amount
of possibilities on picture compositions, ways of expression, showed me
the possible combinations of forms and tone scales. The higher time
expenditure and expense of the Large format equipment and of the own
laboratory require a more concentrated method of working. For a long
term though it pays itself off through more convincing pictures. The
intense occupation with black-and-white photography trained my eye for
graphic forms and special tone scale conditions. After a phase of "color
abstinence" I recognized the possibilities of extending these forms and
tone scale conditions also into the color photography, because I am
convinced that their conscious use can also be used there. I got clear
to me that neither an exclusive black-and-white nor exclusive color
photography is better but that every subject requires its own individual
conversion by the photographer instead. There seldom are subjects which
are really convincing at these two different worlds. I generally prefer
the black-and-white photography, but I would also further like to
sensitize conscious using of color as another element for the picture
composition. In first place, forms, the tone scale as well as their
relations to each other fascinate me. Their representation in gray or
color depends both on the subject and on my inner ideas. I am neither
pupil of Ansel Adams nor of Joseph Beuys. (Please check out my other
sites: Gigabitfilm Gruppe V Moersch Photochemie GbR Heiland electronic
GmbH)

[**Fishing Vessels And Trawlers From
Denmark**](http://home13.inet.tele.dk/stine) - photos of fishing vessels
from Gilleleje harbour and much more

[**Fulford-brown Imaging**](http://www.fbimaging.com) - large format
digital phographers, specialising in advertising product /cosmetic
photography and lingerie to fine art reproduction work. working from a
medium sized studio in Wimbledon south London England. The studio was
set up in 1987 with 10 years experience before that with a leading firm
of photograpers.

[**Geographical Imagination | Koichi
Watanabe**](http://www.yo.rim.or.jp/~kwat/geo/) - This site is my
photographic works titled "geographical imagination". Each image has
panoramic format, but they are constructed by 3 or 6 4"x5"images. I am
based in Osaka region ,Japan. These images are japanese landscapes.Have
fun!

[**Jem Creative Images**](http://www.jemcreativeimages.com) - Large
format color landscapes , doors andwindows,fineart composite
Black-and-White prints and altered polaroids

[**Jim's Home Page**](http://www.ucalgary.ca/~jburton) - landscape and
"non- landscape" images

[**Michael Meyer Photography**](http://www.michaelmeyerphoto.com) - Fine
art and documentary photographs. Large format projects include:
Transience, Mapping Self, Walled Moments and commercial interiors. 35mm
documentary projects include the Nuyorican Poets' Cafe and My Black
Family Album. Please have a look at let me know what you think. Thanks.

[**Paul Schuster A Guy W/some Photo
Stuffs**](http://www.schusterphoto.com) - random and sometimes confusing
to the uninitiated. I'm just a guy w/ some photo gear! using 35mm,
medium and large format (4x5) often using infrared films and the
occasional beverage.

[**Pennine Landscape**](http://www.richard-littlewood.com) - black and
white work mainly centered around the pennine area of northern england.

[**Personal Website**](http://www.witho.nl) - Witho (William Thomas) is
a professional photographer. He photographs the Dutch landscape in the
so called polders, land once under the water. Besides the landscapes he
also portrais people, in his studio or on location. He works both on
11x14 and 12x20 inch. He prints his work almost exclusively in platinum.

[**Professionnal Photographer**](http://www.hebert-photo.com) - I'm a
french photographer. You will see on this website most of my private
work, using small, medium and large format cameras, and part of my
commercial work in 360 °panoramic photography.

[**Scott Bickell Photography**](http://www.scottdb.com) - Large format,
custom built cameras, pinhole, plastic and digital cameras. Images from
New Zealand, Australia, Indonesia, Thailand, Prague, Utah, and my home
state of Washington.

[**Tom Purin PHOTOGRAPHIC ILLUSTRATION**](http://www.tompurin.com) -
World Class Commercial and Illustrative Photography accepting
assignments from all over the world

[**Www.RenePirolt.com**](http://www.RenePirolt.com) - Landscape, Fine
Art, and Black and White large format photography by Rene Pirolt.

[**Www.mutmansky.com**](http://www.mutmansky.com) - Michael is a
platinum/palladium printer, using 8x10 and 7x17 cameras.

[**Zone System 2000**](http://home.att.net/~shipale/) - film tube
developing for zone system users FP4 and Tri-X
