---
title: "cheapwood"
---

Large Format Photography:cheap woodfield cameras

cheap woodfield cameras
-----------------------

**Compiled by [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for [the
Large Format Page](.)**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

These are current production cameras.

### the Iston from China

The brand name in Chinese is Shenhao. They make both 4x5 and 8x10 and
are available in China. The 8x10 costs about \$500. The 4x5 price is
about half of that, or you can get a 4x5 with a 210F3.5 (yes, F3.5) lens
for about \$500. Never actually used them but played them for a while in
store. They are not sturdy, in particular the 8x10, and the focusing is
kind of rough. The store owner told me that everyone bought these had to
rebuild them in someway. After that they are usable. Yangbo Ye
(yey@math.uiowa.edu)

The Iston is distributed & sold in Canada (for about \$400 CDN). It's a
little rough overall but it is still very usable - plus it's cheap. I'm
sure it's probably equivalent to the Indian made Rajah that's sold in
the US. Roger Hein (rogein@interlog.com)

I own a "spruce goose" and they are not a bad little camera. There is no
comparison to the Wisner's or others in that bracket, but they are a
very useable, no frills camera. I tired of lugging my Cambo around and
wanted a field camera, but rebelled at the prices of many of them. I am
sure they are superb instruments, but \$2000 plus for a couple of wooden
standards and a bellows seemed (and still does) a bit much. I photograph
mainly statuary and cemetery landscapes. I needed the large negative and
front and rear tilts. The Iston has those. They also have a rising front
and a crude rear swing. The rear standard also slides forward to
accomodate a 90mm lens. The bellows draw is about 12". Again it is very
basic, but basic was what I needed. If I am doing an architectural shoot
I'll use the Cambo, but for everything else I need the Iston is fine. It
has generous size knobs, easy to use with gloves. I did change the small
set screws that set the infinity position as they were too small for my
hands and replaced the ground glass with a finer one from Calumet. Other
than that no other modification was necessary. The importer was (is) MC
Photographic out of Cleveland, TN. I purchased the camera from Ken
Hanson's in NYC. It cost about \$500. That plus the price of a lens,
loupe, film holders, and bag totalled around \$1400. Less than the cost
of one of the fancier body only outfits around. I realize it is not a
precision studio camera, but I don't look for that in a field camera
anyway. It serves me very well. I would not hesitate to recommend it as
a good working field camera. Frank J. Calidonna
(frank.calidonna@worldnet.att.net)

Argraph carries them. Ask your retailer. (Argraph is a US photo supply
vendor like Dotline or BKA and these vemdors are used by just about
every photo retailer). James Baker (jbaker@email.unc.edu)

### the Rajah from India

The following specs are from a 1984 Petersen article:

     
                                         Rajah Wood Fields
     
                               Cub           Field A          JRF B
     
    Lensboard            3 7/8 x 3 3/4   4 1/4 x 4 1/4   4 1/4 x 4 1/4
    Back (below)                1               2               3
    Bellows Draw               13"             23"             23"
    Max Ext w Std Bellows     300 mm          580 mm          580 mm
    Min Ext w Std Bellows     47 mm           65 mm           65 mm
    Front Swing                 30              30              30
    Front Tilt                  90             360?            360?
    Front Rise/Fall            2.5"           1 5/8"          1 5/8"
    Front Shift                3/4"             0               0
    Rear Swing                  30              30              30
    Rear Tilt                   15              15              15
    Rear Rise/Fall              0               0               0
    Rear Shift                  0               0               0
    Folds w Lens                No             Yes             Yes
    Price US$ in 1984         $300            $300            $250
     
    Back 1: Reversible International
    Back 2: Revolving International
    Back 3: Reversible Spring             

Michael Gudzinowicz (bg174@FreeNet.Carleton.CA)

At one time Rajah view cameras were distributed in the US by Jack
Callahan of Kyvyx Korporation in New Jersey. They look like a copy of a
Deardorff but they are made out of teak instead of mahogony. Rajah made
4x5, 5x7 and 8x10 wood field cameras and accessories. The 8x10 had 33
inches of bellows extension and was originally priced at \$795. Gary
Shank (gshank@why.net)

I've used a Rajah 8x10. Gearing was rough, and I had to use a C-clamp to
keep the front standard from tilting forward with a heavy lens (45cm
Voitlander APO-Skopar process lens - no shutter). However, it did allow
me to start making photographs in 8x10 and for that, I loved it. I think
I paid \$600.00 from NY Lens and Repro about two years ago. If you are
already into LF and think that this will be a cheap Deardorff copy...the
emphasis is on "cheap." Save your \$500.00 towards a higher quality 8x10
at some point down the road. But if it is a choice between starting to
make photographs now and waiting a year....put your money down on the
counter and dive right in, the water's fine. Benjamin Marks
(bm4f@virginia.edu)

### The Ikeda Anba (and Nagaoka) from Japan

An Ikeda Anba is similar to a Tachihara in construction (cherry
wood/chrome fittings) but lighter (1260 v 1660 grams) and smaller
(17x17x5.5 cm) although it has the same bellows extension (300mm). It
has rear base tilt, rear swing, front rise-fall and front axial tilt and
front swing. The front rise-fall can be coaxed into performing shifts by
turning the camera 90 degrees on the tripod head like a 35mm and
rotating the back. Both the Tachihara and the Ikeda take Technica/Wista
boards (holes centered, not offset). I sold my Tachihara after I got an
Ikeda. The only 4x5 I know of that is smaller and lighter are some
versions of the Gowland Pocket View. All three of these cameras make for
good, light field cameras but with decreasing weight comes more
trade-offs in movements and ease of use. Like the Tachihara, the Ikeda
folds up into a mostly self-protecting box. It is light enough to use
with a Bogen 3262QR ballhead with quick-release which further decreases
the overall weight of the field kit. I do add a ground-glass protector
and large Calumet wrap when taking it into the field. Marc F. Hult
(hult@cinternet.net)

The one I have is labeled as an Anba Wood Field Ikeda Factory Tokyo.
Other than appearance (brass plated hardware and red bellows) the only
difference between it and my friend's Nagaoka (chrome hardware and black
bellows) is movements for sliding the back forward for wide angle use on
mine are geared. Not a big functional difference IMHO. Kerry Thalmann
(K.Thalmann@worldnet.att.net)

### 

#### [View or add comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/cheapwood.html)
