Large format photography: contact prints

Contact prints: are they that special ?
---------------------------------------

**Compiled by [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for [the
Large Format Page](.)**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I suffered through a period of "format confusion" about a year ago and
in that time I went through several cameras- 8x10, 7x17, 11x14 and
12x20. The allure of the contact print was just over powering and the
results made the weight and inconvenience a minor consideration. About
the same time I started to use a locked away Deardorff 5x7 and I
composed several pictures with that to match the perspective of my ULF
prints.After looking VERY closely, I managed to convince myself that
there was not really enough of a difference at normal viewing distances
to warrant the fuss and bother of the bigger cameras (not to mention
expense); so I sold off all my ULF stuff and happily went on using the
5x7 enlarging to 18x24 with no regrets. Then two things happened: first,
after not looking at them for over a year I looked at my old 11x14 and
12x20 contact prints. Big mistake!Yes, there isn't a LOT of difference
but damn it I can SEE it (even with my ageing eyes!) BTW, alot of people
won't see it -you have to be somewhat fanatical! Secondly, my friend
Burkhardt from Austria visited me and showed me a lot of his prints.
Once again, the contact 8x10's made me drool but ,more interestingly, I
loved several 8x20 and 12x20 prints that he showed me. In a couple of
cases I had to ask him if they were contacts or not. They WERE'NT. They
were enlargements from 8x10 masked in camera to 4x10 and 6x10
respectively and enlarged to the 8x20 and 12x20 final prints.Were they
really indistinguishable from contact prints of that size? Well, when I
was looking only at them I thought that they WERE contacts. When I
compared my own proportional enlargements to contacts of that size there
WAS a difference but ... My conclusion? Well, unless you are a fanatic
(and there ARE some of us around) you can get pretty good results with
todays emulsions and optics. I also think that it is the FORMAT of the
print that can make a difference 12x20 is such a great format!(is it
because of our movie addiction?) and 8x20 is also very appealing because
I think that is the way our eyes look, sweeping in a large horizontal
view... Because these formats are so appealing I think that enlargements
in those proportions will look great especially from large format negs
i.e. 8x10 and I bet even my 5x7 will be more than fine as should 4x5.
BUT, I tell you....there's nothing like a big contact print,
nothing!!!Also, I love AZO! **Richard Kuzniak**

My experience, through viewing at exhibitions and in my own work, is
that there is a very subtle difference between the two. It's not that
enlargement from 4x5 is not sharp; it is fine. However, the 8x10 seems a
little more "lifelike". For example, a contact print is the best way to
"feel" snow or sand in a print. You can sense the granular surfaces. I
have several fine prints from 4x5 that contain snow/sand and they do not
convey the same sense of surface texture. I am not sure how one would go
about measuring these characteristics, but they do exist. **George
Papas**

I use both 4x5 and 8x10. I can generally see a difference in B&W 11x14
prints in the 2 formats and can almost always see a difference in 16x20
prints in the 2 formats. These observations come from looking at lots of
prints of different subjects made on the 2 formats. In the few cases
where I've made photographs of the same subject on both formats, I
couldn't see anything in an 8x10 print from each that indicated anything
superior about the 8x10 contact though the prints are never completely
identical. I have made a few 1:1 enlargements from 4x5 negatives and
compared them with 4x5 contact prints (I've never done this with 8x10,
though I may have to give it a try now) and always prefered the
enlargements (I found it impossible to make the prints identical). From
those experiments, I think there must be some visible difference between
enlargements and contact prints that someone could learn to recognize. I
don't think there is anything magic or superior to a contact print (I
actually found the 1:1 prints through an enlarging lens sharper than the
contact prints but I'm sure it depends on how close the light used for
the contacts is to a true point source). I was also using a condenser
enlarger at the time and the different grades of paper required make
matching prints harder. My prints were on the same paper (probably
Ilford Multigrade FB, or Oriental Seagull graded, it was a few years
ago). If the prints are on different papers, the differences are likely
to be even wider (I've never been able to make truely identical prints
on any two different papers). **John Sparks**

Its impossible to argue with someone else's experience. I can't see such
a difference \[between 8x10 contact and enlarged from 4x5\] in my own
work. I can see differences in quality as the size of the negative goes
up for a given size enlargement. Certainly the difference between 35mm
and 6x6cm is quite obvious in an 8x10 print. I can see some difference
(but much less than in the first case) in comparing 6x6cm to 4x5 but I
am not sure when looking at old prints whether a photo was taken on 4x5
or 8x10 for an 8x10 print. That's just my visual judgement. I do not at
the moment have an 8x10 enlarger. It would be interesting to make 1:1
projection prints and compare those to contact prints. There are a few
folks out there who have the where withall to do this and I am
interested in observations. I also suspect that some of the "magic"
quality that contact prints are supposed to have are historical memory,
so to speak. When projection paper first came out around the 'teens, it
was Bromide emulsion which did not have very good tonal quality. It was
distinctly inferior to the mostly Chloride contact papers available
then. Modern enlarging paper is a far cry from this stuff. I don't think
any purely Chloride paper has been made for decades. Kodak Azo is a
Chlorobromide paper, like all Kodak papers for over fifty years.
**Richard Knoppow**

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/contact-print.html)
