About the Large Format Photography Info site
--------------------------------------------

### What is this site about ?

[largeformatphotography.info](.) is a primary resource and community of
large format photographers on the internet (including photographers
working with MF view cameras) . It might be a small section of
photography, but the dedication, knowledge, and skill of its
practitioners is usually very high, and you'll find here one of the most
remarkable open photographic communities anywhere, populated by many
experts, but welcoming to beginners as well. The site consists of
several hundred article pages with comments, and a discussion forum with
several tens of thousands messages.

Our mission is to provide a place where large format enthusiasts can
come and exchange freely ideas and help. It is independent, non-profit,
entirely free of advertising and commercial activity, and while we
consider that its contents belongs as a whole to the LF community,
technically each contributor retains the exclusive copyrights to his
postings and the option to have them removed on request, as we do not
clain any rights on them. No financial contribution is required, or even
invited, because we consider that the most valuable contribution is the
time spent by members to contribute contents and maintain the site.

largeformatphotography.info is operated on a volunteer basis by [QT
Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) and [Tom
Westbrook](http://tomwestbrook.com), using server space generously
donated by [Brian Reid](http://reid.org/brian/), refered to us by Tim
Atherton. The forum is moderated by Ralph Barker, Kirk Gittings, Ken
Lee, Neil Poulsen, and Tom Westbrook.

[]{#credits}

### Credits

Q.-Tuan Luong started large format photography in 1993. There were a lot
of things which were mysterious back then. After shooting thousands of
sheets of film, some of them are still mysterious, but in the while, he
has beneficiated from advice of really knowledgeable persons on the net.
This site started in 1995 as an attempt to give back to the community by
detailing a few things he had learned, and displaying in an organized
form the information that he had gathered from the net.

Among the people from whom he has learned the most in the early years,
and whose Usenet postings have been reused to begin this site are
Jean-David Beyer, [Paul Butzi](http://www.butzi.net/), Richard Knoppow,
Barry Sherman, John Sparks, [Kerry Thalmann](http://www.thalmann.com/).

As the site evolved, many people contributed directly articles written
specifically for the site. These include:

-   Paul Barclay
-   George Barr
-   Ralph Barker
-   Jolyon Barrow
-   Eirik Berger
-   Emmanuel Bigler
-   Kevin Bourque
-   Jeroen Bruggeman
-   Geoffrey Chen
-   Carlos Co
-   Nathan Congdon
-   John A. Cook
-   Darin Cozine
-   Arne Croell
-   Michael Davis
-   Peter De Smidt
-   N. Dhananjay
-   Brian Ellis
-   Stewart Ethier
-   Daniel Geiger
-   Jeffrey Goggin
-   Jason Sanford Greenberg
-   Masayoshi Hayashi
-   Edward A. Hoover
-   David C. Karp
-   James M. Kates
-   Pat Kearns
-   Michael J. Kravit
-   Bill Kumpf
-   Ralph Lambrecht
-   Howard Lester
-   Frank Loeffel
-   Rich Long
-   Micah Marty
-   J. C. Metcalf
-   Michael Mutmansky
-   Steven Nestler
-   John O'Connell
-   Paul Owen
-   Luca Paradisi
-   Leigh Perry
-   James Phillips (aka GreyWolf)
-   Gerald Pierce
-   Ernest Purdum
-   Jared Radin
-   Ron Reeder
-   John Sarsgard
-   Eugene Singer
-   Dan Smith
-   David Stein
-   Paul Stimac
-   Nick Thornton
-   Ellis Vener
-   Reinier de Vlaam
-   Tom Westbrook
-   Bob Wheeler
-   Sean Yates

(sorry, I might have missed a few). And everyone who contributes a point
of view by leaving a comment on a web page deserves thanks.

A few photographers have also authorized this site to reproduce some of
their previously published writings. Those include:

-   Paul Hansma
-   Howard Bond
-   Stephen Petterson
-   Robert White
-   John Sexton

After he started putting up this site, readers began to email him
questions, many of them beyond what he knew.

The forum started in 1997, using server, bandwidth, and forum software
(Lusenet) provided generously for free by Philip Greenspun to the
internet community. This software, more carefully though of, in its
simplcity, than many more recent ones, is one of the main factors who
made this forum a success. It has grown to become an outstanding
resource thanks to readers, including more than 60000 postings by
mid-2002. Besides providing the essential community tools used by the
first incarnation of this site, Philip Greenspun has also been a
constant source of inspiration through his own site, especially in its
former non-commercial incarnation.

In June 2002, service on Philip Greenspun's Lusenet system was abruptly
discontinued for the LF Forum. The QA Forum software on
largeformatphotography.info replicates the Lusenet system, a testimony
to its design excellence. It is the product of the work of several
volunteers. The idea of rewriting Lusenet using the more widely
available PHP/Mysql platform was due to [Josh
Wand](http://joshwand.com/) who developed a first prototype. The effort
was subsequently taken over by [Bjorn Nilsson](http://binoni.nu/). After
Bjorn suffered a severe accident, the work was finished by [Tom
Westbrook](http://tomwestbrook.com), who also transfered the original
postings from Lusenet based on data graciouly provided to us by Philip
Greenspun. All volunteered their time and talent to make this happen.
Some history is available in [old polls](polls/), and [Why not at
photo.net ?](lfphotoinfo.html). []{#terms}

### Terms and Conditions of Use

#### Intellectual Property Rights

By submitting materials to this site, you you are representing that are
you are the owner, or are authorized by the owner to do so. As a
consequence, all the material posted in this site is assumed copyrighted
by their respective authors, and shouldn't be reproduced without
permission and proper credit by any means, including framing. The site
doesn't claim copyright to any material submitted by readers. However,
by submitting materials to this site, you grant a revokable royalty-free
licence to the maintainers of this site to publish that material on the
largeformatphotography.info site. No other rights are granted, and this
licence might be terminated at any time by written request of the owner.
The site will not use your materials without proper attribution to you,
nor will it edit them in a way that would misrepresent your intent.

#### No contractual relation

By accessing the site, you agree not to hold responsible the site
maintainers for anything which happens as a consequence of your use of
the site. In particular, the site maintainers do not endorse or make any
statement about the content posted by readers. They might not be even be
aware of some material posted by readers. They reserve the right to edit
or remove entirely your submitted materials from the site without
reasons.

#### Prohibited behavior

By accessing this site, you agree not to abuse other site users, neither
by posting offensive comments (like personal attacks or insulting
language) nor by sending them unsollicitated bulk email or commercial
sollicitations.

### How you can help

Like the people listed before, consider contributing an article to the
static page. For a discussion of areas where contributions are
particularly sought, see [this Forum
message](http://www.greenspun.com/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg.tcl?msg_id=003rxJ).
Material about the techniques and experience (for instance trip reports)
is particularly welcome. The preferred format is HTML, but you can also
send me MS Word files or plain text, and I will do the formatting. As
previously mentioned, you retain full copyright for all your
contributions, which will become visible to a large audience. You are
welcome to say a few words and place links about yourself, your work, or
your website, in a footer area of a contributed article.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
