Large Format Cameras: Ebony RW45

Ebony RW45 : a review
---------------------

**By [Peter De Smidt](http://desmidt.net/) for [the Large Format
Page](.)**

The camera is made of titanium and mahogany, the latter of which is
finished with a dark stain and what looks like a penetrating oil finish,
which should be quite easy to keep looking good. It has all of the
standard movements except front shift, rear shift or rear rise.
Personally, I don't miss these movements in a field camera, and their
elimination helps keep weight down and rigidity up. I especially like
the large (approximately 4.5 inch) square titanium plate on the bottom
of the camera, which has the tripod socket centered in the middle. This
thoughtful addition should prevent the bottom of the camera getting
damaged when attaching it to a tripod or quick release plate. The camera
uses technika style boards, and it comes with an abs ground glass
protector. The ground glass system includes a plastic ground glass with
built in fresnel and a clear glass protector plate. The camera has solid
detents for tilt on the front and rear standards. The maximum extension
I measured with the standards in their normal upright position is 325mm.
Tilting the front standard forward increases the extension to 370mm, and
tilting the back brings the camera up to its maximum of 400mm of
extension. My sample weighed in at a light 4 lbs. 3.6 oz.

In the field the camera was very easy to use. The controls work
smoothly, and all the movements lock down very well. The titanium
hardware exudes quality, and the knobs have a very nice knurl. I
especially liked the large size of the right side focusing knobs, as
they were very easy to use with gloves. All of the movements of the
camera (except extension) have metal to metal surfaces, with the
occasional nylon washer thrown in. Thus the camera ought to \`wear' very
well and also take humidity changes in stride. All of the controls fall
easily to hand, except the rear swing knobs, which are a little harder
(but not that hard) to get at. The lens boards are held tightly in place
by a single slider mechanism, and the camera back is held in place by
two sliders. Thus, changing lens boards and back orientation can be
accomplished very quickly.

The camera I used had Ebony's \`universal' bellows, which has a bag
bellows like section at the front and regular pleats in back. With this
bellows I was able to use both my Fuji 300c as well as my 90mm without
losing any movement extension. I'm not sure, though, how well lenses
shorter than 90mm would work, as there's a limit to how far the pleated
part of the bellows will compress.

Despite it's light weight, the camera is quite rigid. The Ebony is
significantly more rigid than a Zone VI Ultra Light Weight camera that I
got to play with recently, and, unlike the Zone VI, the Ebony's rigidity
stays very constant over it's whole range. When moderate pressure was
applied to the top of the back, I could get a little movement. This was
due to the rivet joints at the base of the rear standard. This
\`looseness' was very minimal, and, since the front rivet joints did not
show any signs of this, I expect that the two back joints came loose
through use on my demo camera. I expect that Ebony could tighten this
up. Even with this minor peccadillo, the Ebony is the most rigid wooden
field camera that I've used, and this includes a Wisner 8x10, Agfa 5x7
and a number of others.

At first I was worried that the camera's lack of bubble levels would
make it hard to level the camera. This was not the case, though, since
the ground glass has a clear (as opposed to black line) grid on it. This
made avoiding the convergence of verticals a simple matter. I also liked
the evenness and brightness of the ground glass. It's very similar to
the Linhof Super Screen that I use in my Sinar. Just for fun, compared
how the Ebony screen handled a 110mm f18 protar to a standard Sinar
ground glass. While focusing and framing was very difficult with the
standard screen, the view on the Ebony screen was even and plenty
bright. This was the case for every lens between 110 and 350 mm that I
tried. With my 90, focusing was fine, but the screen became less evenly
illuminated, but in any case it was still better than the standard Sinar
glass. Plus, it's very unlikely that one would ever break the ground
glass in the field (it's being plastic). Sure, you might crack the
protective ground glass, but this is simply clear glass that you can
have cut for you by any glass shop for a few bucks. This is in marked
contrast to the cost of replacing a Sinar glass screen!

All in all the Ebony is the nicest wooden view camera that I've used.
While some cameras are lighter (the Toho 45X), the Ebony is easier to
use, since is more straightforward changing lens and back orientation.
It's is also significantly more rigid than 4x5's like the Tachihara.
Other field cameras, such as Wisner and Zone VI models, have more
extension, but either they are either heavier (Wisner) or are less rigid
(Zone VI). If you'd like a wooden field camera, and you use lenses
between 90 and 300mm, I highly recommend the Ebony RW45.

#### More info

-   The manufacturer's specifications can be found at
    [www.ebonycamera.com](http://www.ebonycamera.com)
-   It's available for \$1795 from [Badger Graphic
    Sales](http://www.badgergraphic.com/)

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/ebony-rw45.html)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](http://desmidt.net/)

Visit http://desmidt.net for contact information and to see Peter De
Smidt's images
