Large format cameras: a review of the Phillips 8x10 Explorer Camera

Phillips 8x10 Explorer Camera: A Review
---------------------------------------

**by [Michael Mutmansky](mailto:michael@mutmansky.com) for the [Large
Format Page](.)**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Photo of 8x10 Explorer](phillips1.jpg)

**Overview**

The Philips 8x10 Explorer camera is an 8x10 field camera that departs
from the traditional approach to camera design and using modern
technology materials and applications, results in a camera that looks
like no camera you've ever seen before.

The camera is made with wood, anodized aluminum, and some high tech
materials (Teflon, Derlin, epoxy coatings, fiberglass composite). The
camera doesn't go overboard on technology, but uses it where the right
material has benefits that few others offer. For example, the rear
standard sits on the main bed with a Teflon interface between. This
makes adjusting the rear standard smooth. The bed is wood coated in
fiberglass and epoxy, which makes it light, very rigid, not susceptible
to humidity, and has a very strong 'skin' to prevent surface dings.

The bed is made of three individual parts. There is the main bed, which
has the tripod holes and is the largest piece of fiberglass-covered
wood. On this sits two other pieces; one that secures the rear standard
to the bed, and the other contains the screw focus mechanism and holds
the front standard.

This camera is a horizontal-only 8x10 field camera. It was designed to
be an extremely lightweight and compact camera for use when portability
is paramount. The horizontal-only format eliminates the need for an
interchangeable back, saving depth in the back, and also saving height
in the overall camera dimensions. This further affects the dimensions of
the bellows, resulting in an 8x10 rectangular bellows as opposed to the
more traditional 10x10 on a normal camera.

The bellows are shorter than a normal 8x10 camera, measuring out to
allow 21 inches at maximum extension. While this does limit the use of
longer 8x10 lenses, I found no difficulty using a 450mm lens on the
camera. The shorter bellows should make the use of a lens as short as
120mm easier than the typical field camera also.

Since it is a horizontal-only camera, people will need to flip the
camera to the side on the tripod head to shoot verticals. There are two
3/8" tripod holes, one of them located offset to the side. This permits
easier use of the camera for verticals. However, Phillips suggests this
camera may not be suitable for you if you shoot more than 2% of your
images in vertical format.

There are several options available on the Explorer, including an
additional level, a bail lift, a mounting bar for a Toyo compendium
hood, and a Lexan groundglass cover. My camera has all these options.

**Specifications**

Front Movements

-   Axis tilt limited only by bellows (LOBB)
-   Axis swing LOBB
-   Shift 2.5"
-   Rise 2.2"
-   Fall 1.7"

Rear Movements

-   Base tilt unlimited front, 27 degrees back
-   Swing approximately 6 degrees

Bellows

-   21" maximum draw
-   Will accommodate a 120mm lens

Physical Properties

-   Weight - 5.9 pounds
-   Dimensions folded, 13.2"Wx11.2"Lx3"D
-   Optional bail adds 3 oz.
-   Spirit level built into bed, optional linear level mounted on top of
    back standard.

**Set Up**

The camera has a large fiberglass coated wood bed with two 3/8" tripod
holes. One is mounted in the center of the bed; the other is mounted
off-center to facilitate the use of the camera for vertical photographs.
I contacted Kirk Enterprises, and discussed getting an Arca Swiss
compatible mounting plate that would bolt into both of the holes. Kirk
has a plate that will accommodate this camera with only minor
modifications. It is a special order, however, so lead times will be
longer than usual. This plate eliminates the possibility for the
mounting plate to twist and loosen when shooting in vertical
orientation.

Once the camera is mounted to a tripod, the bar knobs that control rear
tilt are loosened, and the back tilted up into vertical position. There
are detents in the tracks to facilitate locating the correct starting
position. Lift the front standard off the bed, and rotate the front
standard rails into position. At this point, a decision must be made to
select the correct mounting hole for the front standard. There are three
holes in the bed for mounting the front standard; the selecting the hole
is based on the focal length of the lens intended.

There is a spirit level mounted at the front of the main bed to level
the camera initially. There is a second linear level mounted to the top
of the camera at the groundglass to level the rear of the camera.

The front standard rails must be near perpendicular to the bed for the
mounting screw to easily be attached, so care must be used at this point
in the assembly. It does become fairly automatic with use, but you may
find yourself fumbling a bit if you can't see the front of the camera.
For this reason, I find the camera is much easier to set up from the
front.

The lens in mounted in the traditional manner, except that the gate that
holds the lens on the top pivots on a single screw, rather than sliding
in tracks like many other cameras. The lensboard is a wooden Phillips
12-ply micro-laminate plywood, or a Sinar or Horseman board. Phillips
notes that Sinar clone boards may not fit.

**Making Images**

The most significant innovation this camera has is the focusing method.
There is a threaded screw drive mechanism that is attached to a small
universal joint under the bellows. The focus knob is directly below the
back standard in the center of the camera. This U-joint allows the
photographer the hold the focus knob at just about any convenient angle
and easily focus the camera. One aspect of this that I have found as an
unexpected bonus is that your hands do not need to directly handle the
camera while focusing. This makes the focus very smooth and eliminates a
great deal of image vibration on the ground glass.

Front tilt and rise/fall are adjusted with the same T-bar knobs, but I
have found that is easy to adjust rise or fall, tighten the knobs
partway to hold the adjustment, and then make a tilt adjustment. At that
point the knobs can be tightened all the way. While loose, there is a
tilt limit stop that will keep the standard vertical so that rise or
fall can be adjusted independently. Front swing is accomplished by
loosening the T-bar knob used to secure the front standard to the front
bed piece.

Rear tilt adjustments are made using the two T-bars that were used to
set the camera up. The rear standard can be adjusted by loosening the
two round knobs that secure the rear standard bed assembly to the main
bed. Once loosened, the rear standard can be pushed foreword to
accommodate short focal length lenses, pulled back for longer lenses, or
swung by going foreword on one side and back on the other. This is not
an ideal system for swing, and at times using this swing can also
introduce a certain amount of shift to the rear standard. However, I
have found the swing adequate for the fieldwork I do. Most field
photographers use little swing; tilt is much more heavily used, and the
tilt mechanisms on this camera work without compromise.

The back of the camera is not removable. Since it is a horizontal-only
camera, there was no reason to make the back convertible. Ultimately,
this contributes to the reduced size and weight of the camera. The
groundglass frame is connected to the back with a pair of stainless
steel springs. As with all large format cameras, the springs are
designed to exert a fairly strong force to sandwich a filmholder firmly
between the groundglass frame and the filmholder guides. For this
reason, the optional bail is of great utility, allowing the insertion of
film holders to be smooth, reducing the chance for jarring the camera.
When not in use, the bail arm clips to the groundglass frame so that it
does not bounce around or stick out. I find the bail works exceptionally
well, and highly recommend getting this option, even though it adds to
the weight and cost.

**Overall Impression**

The camera was purchased in mint condition from a reputable Midwest
dealer (more on the reason why in the 'Phillips Background' Section).
When the camera arrived, it was apparent that it had never been used.
Because of its condition, I expect that the camera is operating as the
factory would intend.

The camera is extremely rigid. Once the front standard is screwed to the
bed and the rear standard tilt screws locked down, the rigidity of the
system is outstanding. Considering that this camera weighs in at 5.9
pounds, the rigidity is nothing short of spectacular. The camera is only
slightly less rigid when fully extended than it is in a normal assembled
position. Both flexure and twist effects have been kept to a minimum
through the intelligent design of the three-part bed. In this respect
Phillips has not sacrificed the integrity of the system for weight
savings.

The rear access focus U-joint is an excellent innovation in this camera.
The rear focus knob permits the photographer to do the final composition
and fine focusing without reaching around the darkcloth to the front
standard. I found this feature to be very useful, and had no difficulty
changing my habits to accommodate the new focus location.

![Photo of 8x10 Explorer Focus Knob](phillips2.jpg) *Note the round
focus knob on U-joint angled downward from camera bed.*

Here is a list of additional comments on the design of the camera that
are worth considering:

**Likes**

-   The lack of weight is most welcome.
-   The small size is beneficial, but not as significant as the low
    weight.
-   The rigidity of the camera makes shooting in windy conditions
    possible.
-   The bail is very easy to use, and makes inserting filmholders
    uneventful.
-   The level mounted on top of the camera is visible, even from the
    side and below the level vial.
-   All the knobs are captive, so they won't loosen and get lost while
    driving a rough road.
-   The knurled round knobs are fairly large, and the rest are T-bar
    knobs, making them easy to handle with gloves on.
-   Sleek, low profile black appearance does not attract attention. This
    is not a display piece, but a functional tool for making
    photographs.
-   Once learned, assembly of the camera is rapid, and 'squaring up' is
    almost automatic.

**Dislikes**

-   The method used to close up the camera is non-intuitive to most LF
    users. You need to learn how to do it properly. Most cameras employ
    a method where the front standard is loosened, and then folded down
    onto itself to close. On this camera, the front standard unscrews
    completely from the bed, and the front standard is then set down
    onto the bed with the standard base pointing out, and the standard
    arms pointing inward. It takes two hands to do the procedure. Once
    learned, however, it is easy to perform.
-   I occasionally find myself fumbling with the front standard when
    screwing it to the bed. The bellows can be stiff enough to make
    squaring up the front standard to the bed difficult. I have found
    that it is much easier to set up the camera from the front for this
    reason.
-   Two turnbutton devices on the camera (front standard tilt limiter
    and lensboard gate latch) seem to be design afterthoughts rather
    than fully integrated design features. They do what they are
    designed to do, but they seem to be a bit less refined than the rest
    of the camera details.
-   To make the rear level visible from below leaves it exposed. Rough
    handling will result in a broken level vial, and the need to have it
    replaced. This is the price to pay for having a level visible from
    below.

**Conclusion**

Many companies in the industry are adding patented design features and
enhancements that improve their specification sheets and add greatly to
the price of the camera, but are of dubious utility for field shooters.
Richard Phillips has gone the other direction with his camera design
philosophy by eliminating all but the necessities. Experienced field
shooters know what features they find useful in a field camera, and this
camera has been designed to meet these requirements.

Richard Phillips has advanced large format camera design significantly
with his marriage of high tech and traditional materials as well as his
outside-the-box design approach.

![Photo of 8x10 Explorer on Tripod](phillips3.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Phillips Background**

R.H. Phillips & Sons is a small company, and their ability to
manufacture cameras is limited by the size of the facilities. Richard
has told me that they effectively build one line of cameras at a time,
and then re-tool and build another line of cameras.

This fact, along with the overall popularity of the cameras has led to
some very long lead times for delivery of a new camera. This is the
reason I purchased my camera used; I have an order in on an 8x10 Compact
II camera but I don't expect to see that camera until 2001. Also,
because of their popularity, a used Phillips camera doesn't show up on
the used market very often. I found the Explorer used, and decided to
get it with the intent to sell it once my Compact II is ready for
delivery.

I tend to shoot enough verticals to make this camera inconvenient at
times. However, by the time my Compact II is ready, I may not be willing
to part with this one. The size and weight of this camera are so
compelling that the benefit of easier vertical format may become less
important to me. Only time will tell.

The Phillips line now includes a 4x5, (available in several different
variations), the two 8x10 models, an 11x14 model, and the newly
announced 8x16 model. In most of these models, options are available to
permit the tailoring of the camera to the particular need of the
individual.

Phillips cameras are only available direct from the factory in the
United States and most of the world. They can be contacted at:

R.H. Phillips & Sons\
2283 Old Pine Trail\
Midland, MI 48642\

T 517-835-7897\
F 517-839-9745

Email rhphill@concentric.net

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/phillips.html)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](mailto:michael@mutmansky.com)

michael@mutmansky.com
