Large Format Photography: Ultra Large/Panoramic Camera Workshop - trip
report

Review of Monster Camera Workshop
---------------------------------

**By [Dan Smith](mailto:shooter@brigham.net) for [the Large Format
Page](.)**

The Waterford Institute and The Waterford School are located in Sandy,
Utah. With head of the Photo Department, Tillman Crane(formerly of Maine
Photographic Workshops) the school held a Ultra Large/Panoramic Camera
Workshop. Tillman is an excellent one to put this on as he regularly
shoots with a 12x20 inch view camera. The experience and familiarity
showed throughout the workshop and helped all of us who attended.

Another help was the staff he assembled. All experienced and
knowledgeable. All worked one on one with those who attended the
workshop. They were all available and gave freely of both time and
knowledge. This was one of two major reasons I would go to this workshop
again. The other I will mention later.

### The instructors

Steve Simmons, publisher of View Camera magazine and a commercial
photographer familiar with LF photography. As an architectural
photographer, his session with a group at the Utah State Capitol was
time well spent. Questions were answered, photos were made and his
perspective on using these extremely large cameras on location, under
difficult lighting conditions, was a big help to those who took
advantage of his knowledge. Steve is the author of Using the View
Camera, published by Amphoto and teaches workshops in Large Format
Photography across the United States.

Michael A. Smith, fine art photographer noted for his excellent images
with the 8x20 and 18x22 inch view camera. With images in the permanent
collections of over 100 museums across the world, nearly 200
exhibitions, years of experience in teaching and hosting workshops and a
number of highly acclaimed photographic books to his credit, he was well
qualified. He is a good teacher as well, with his finest moments being
one on one or with small groups rather than in front of the group as a
whole. It is a matter of being able to demonstrate on the camera,
looking at the image on the ground glass-it limits you to smaller
numbers. In the field with the smaller group and cameras from 4x10 to
12x20 in hand(or on tripod), Michael shined. Not telling one how to do
things, but gentle suggestions and experienced guidance as we tried to
handle unfamiliar gear, lenses and film. Michael's darkroom sessions
were good demonstrations and he was available to answer questions and
demonstrate technique. His work has a simplicity that matches the ultra
large cameras. He develops film by inspection & makes contact prints
using Amidol and Azo. Nothing hi-tech, but the images he produces and
showed are stunning. He was excellent.

Paula Chamlee, Michael's wife & partner, shoots with 8x10 and 8x20 and
has a clear, concise vision that shines with her flawless technique.
Again, images in major collections, shows across the world and books
fill out the resume. Impressive and inspiring both. Her darkroom
demonstration on hand developing large format film by inspection had
participants successfully processing film formats from 8x10 to 8x20
inches by inspection in a day. Her experience showed, side by side with
us in the darkroom,as the large film was checked by green safelight for
a few second in the middle of development and finessed to create good
negatives where a straight time/temperature method would have come out
much differently. In the field, Paula spent time with us individually,
checking images and helping with exposure & vision. The emphasis was on
the total image quality. Quiet suggestions, no "do this" and no
directing. The time was spent on 'the whole image' on the ground glass,
visualizing and setting up for perfect results. Often we would be
working on an image & look up to see Paula and another photographer both
under the darkcloth at the same time working together on the
composition. Personal attention seems to be her style & it works well.

Tillman Crane put the workshop together. A lot of work. A good workshop.
Tillman began his career as a photojournalist with The Daily Times in
Maryville, Tennessee and later worked as a photographer for the State of
Tennessee. He began teaching for the Maine Photographic Workshops in
1987 and worked on his MFA at the same time. In 1970 he completed the
MFA at the University of Delaware and taught full time at Maine
Photographic Workshops until the end of 1994. He is a contributing
editor for View Camera Magazine, having written many article on the
craft of B&W printing. He prints in silver and platinum/palladium and
his finely crafted 12x20 prints are excellent. His instruction during
the workshop was 'hands on'. Just getting the staff and manufacturers
together was no easy feat, yet he got it done. His teaching style is
laid back & relaxed which helps keep the anxiety level down when one is
working with a mammoth camera(worth over \$6000) and lenses that are
unfamiliar.

Keith Canham, owner of KB Canham Cameras was good. He brought a number
of his cameras and we all had a chance to use them. Keith is
knowledgeable and easy to work with. Just as with the others, one on one
with the cameras, both his and others, worked very well.

John Horowy, of Lotus View Cameras was also very good. He brought a
number of Lotus cameras and, just as with the Canham's, we got a chance
to use them. Again, one on one was the norm & it worked well.

Ron Wisner, of Wisner Classic Manufacturing Co, Inc., spent time with us
also. Watching him take an hour and a half with one
participant-patiently working out composition, bellows factors and
exposure(using another makers camera) tells you a lot. He makes & sells
cameras but photographs are the goal no matter the brand.

Keith Soderstrom provided Reis Tripods for the workshop. Nice stuff and
a nice guy. His experience and input was welcome as there were a lot of
nervous photographers putting 12-30 pound cameras on tripods.

Fred Newman of Darkroom Innovations, Inc.(the guys who make the BTZS
tubes & a potload of other neat stuff) was entertaining and
knowledgeable. His reliance on basic yet scientific testing-captured in
his palm sized computer, was amazing. Tell him the film & basics & he
came up with everything from exposure to development-hold the mayo! With
his approach and reliance on the scientific tools we had a perfect
counterpoint to Michael and his easy going methods. Watching Fred &
Michael together was entertaining as both are opinionated, both get good
results and both were informative tho taking very different approaches.
The show was especially good for those looking for "the one true way".

Jeff Wheeler of Quality Camera, Atlanta, Georgia. A whiz in lens and
camera information and one who sells this type of equipment. He was
helpful with technical as well as shooting information. His knowledge of
what was needed and how & where to find it was good and welcome. Most of
us wouldn't know where to find gear such as this, especially since most
camera shops don't even have 4x5 gear, much less larger formats.

Tracy Storer and the Calumet/Polaroid 20x24 camera...WOW. With no
shooting fee other than the \$45 per image it was a big hit. Big, heavy,
impressive and a finished print in 60 seconds. Waiving the studio fees,
which range from \$250 to \$1200 for the time, this camera was popular.
Tracy gave a good slide show on the camera & its history & then was on
hand to guide us in use of the mammoth camera. Some good images were
made with it. If you have ever wanted to shoot this one, the price of
the workshop & the deal on film cost makes it cheaper to take the
workshop just to shoot it than going to NY or San Francisco to do so.
Not a bad deal.

Those were the main players at the workshop and all gave personal help
freely. Few group lectures and few big groups. Generally one on one to
one to three in the field. A good way to work.

### What happened

The first day was spent with the 8x10 camera, very large format for
most. A few had never shot a 4x5 and most nothing larger than 5x7. A
short field trip up Little Cottonwood Canyon to use the 8x10's gave
instant experience, more than can be done by reading. With instructors
present, basic setup and use was covered and film exposed. Reading hand
held meters & development considerations at the time of shooting were
covered. Hands on was the order of the day. Tillman said next year there
will be more 8x10's available which will make it even better. Back at
the school, unloading film holders and re-loading was covered by doing
it, not talking about it. This quickly expanded to loading formats up to
20x24. With these big cameras this can be an event. Most photographers I
know have never even had a photo printed that large, much less loaded
and shot with film of that size. The day ended with a barbecue at the
school, green grass & a hot July day melding into a quiet evening with
participants getting aquainted. Friendly & enjoyable & the food was
good.

The next morning we started with introductions and got busy. Film,
metering and format considerations were covered, with the emphasis on
results rather than the ritual. The idea was to create photographs and
help the participants to do so. Michael and Paula each took an 8x10 and
split the group and spent time on camera basics, setup, handling and
vision. It was time well spent. After lunch(all good food & plenty of
it) we went to a local park of about 30 acres and started to photograph.
There I am under the darkcloth of an 8x20 inch camera as storm clouds
roll in & the rain starts. Thunder & lightening & people running for
cover and the vans while trying to keep big, big cameras dry. Ever try
to run while balancing an 8x20 camera, darkcloth bigger than Rhode
Island and a big Reis Tripod on your shoulder while your assistant has
his arms loaded with film holders, meter and accessories? Quite a sight.
The rain stopped & the lightening passed & we came out to shoot some
more. All in all, a good intro to big-big cameras, big glass & big
problems for anyone crazy enough to get caught in the rain a long way
from the vehicle or shelter with these things. Amazingly enough, the
makers didn't seem too worried. The wooden cameras didn't get harmed,
the holders did fine and the results later in the darkroom showed good
results.

Evenings were spent in darkroom demos, processing film, printing and
some lectures. Paula and Michael showed a number of original
prints-excellent work. Have you ever seen originals of 8x20 or 18x22
inch prints on Azo(developed in amidol) which has a greater tonal range
than prints on platinum? Razor sharp with depth and emotion. Very
impressive.

A trip to Abravanel Hall(home of the Utah Symphony) or Big Cottonwood
Canyon made up a big part of the next day. Choose one or the other &
both groups got good work. Different challenges, different lighting &
different experiences-all good. Great architectural views at the
Symphony site with the 20x24 camera was impressive. Small details shot
with 12x20 and 4x10 posed different problems. Ever try a horizontal 8x20
inch camera turned on its side to shoot a vertical? Almost gave one
camera maker a heart attack-"We have a vertical camera if you would like
to use it..." was his comment as he turned pale at the sight. Then, back
for darkroom work & demonstrations, finally ending around 10pm. A long
day but a fun one.

Friday we all went to the Historic Baron Woolen Mill in Brigham City,
about an hour and a half North of the campus in Sandy, Utah. A full day
trip. All cameras except the Polaroid 20x24. Lighting challenges and
reciprocity problems. Dark, oily machinery and soft North light coming
through banks of windows. There should be an image or two from this day
in an upcoming issue of View Camera magazine. As Tillman said, "You are
being hit with all the difficulties possible today. Big cameras you are
unfamiliar with. Exposures that can range to over an hour. Close focus.
Lighting extremes. This place has it all." Some good images came out of
it and a number of participants will be making contact with me to come
back and shoot it privately. It was a good day and most couldn't wait to
drive back & process the film.

Saturday was an architectural photo trip with Steve Simmons at the Utah
State Capitol. Being familiar with it I opted for the Canham 4x10 with
90mm Schneider XL-an extreme wide angle combination. I did get a few
decent images with it also. But I spent time watching Steve Simmons work
with people. He's a good teacher. Ron Wisner spent a lot of time with
one participant on one image-personal attention that helped the image to
be successful. Personal attention with the camera he had made. Paula
Chamlee did the same with others.

### Impressions

Everyone who wanted or needed help had an experienced expert at hand.

Workshop participants ranged from experienced shooters to some who had
never mounted a 4x5 on a tripod. It was a good introduction from the
ground up, with our making images with the cameras, interspersed with
classroom and darkroom time provided information and practical
application quickly.

Questions were asked and answered. Experienced users and teachers helped
a lot here. There was no lack of knowledge. One of the best aspects for
me and many others was in seeing the same results coming from different
viewpoints and different working styles. One instructor relies on
testing & computer analysis while another calls upon 30+ years of
experience and field use. Ask a question on a lens and get everything
from pricing, availability and practical use to a dissertation on
coating methods if you wanted it.

As to cameras...

All I can say is if you have ever wanted hands on, real world
experience, side by side with the expensive gear most of us can only
dream about-This is THE workshop.

From comparing three to five manufacturers cameras side by side to
actually shooting with these in the field, one quickly learns that
brochures and statistics aren't sufficient. Shooting the same film
format in a Wisner, then a Canham and then a Lotus is enlightening,
especially when you go from these to a Toyo or something else. What
sounds great on paper translates to difficult to work with knobs in my
fingers to the same camera being just right for the next user. All were
beautiful. All were well made and the three brands all had the
makers/distributors-actual camera users-there to help. All without sales
spiels. They let their cameras do the talking for them.

As a result of this hands on approach, I know which 5x7 and(If I ever do
go larger) bigger one I will buy if and when the time comes. I will also
know who I am talking to when I call to order one or have questions. I
will know from experience I couldn't get at a trade show. I have
actually used them as has everyone in the workshop. I and the others
know, from hands on use, how they handle and how BIG they really are.
This helps a lot in considering what we may want to try/buy in the
future. A 16x20 sounds great, but reality is that it is a lot like
trying to drive a Peterbilt truck in a residential neighborhood. A lot
of things to consider other than just a big negative. But if I do go
that big, or even larger, I have some experience on which to base my
choice.

Film holders are another big consideration that we worked with. Wood or
plastic or a combination? Light leaks? How solid are they? How heavy?
How easy to load or unload? How to carry them?

We got practical answers by using them. Loading & unloading. Shlepping
them around in bright sunlight and the dusty areas of a dry desert
streambed. Trying to run for cover holding them while at the same time
balancing 25 pounds of camera and tripod on the shoulders as lighting
and rain hurried us along. And yes, the instructors were as wet as we
were.

All film holders are not created equal and when one pays around \$400
for one of them, knowing which feels best to you and works in your style
of shooting can help a lot. Some cameras require specific holders made
just for them. Other holders of the same size are usable with most
cameras of that size. Some felt very smooth and had the rich feel of
hand finished wood while others(fully functionable and usable) had the
modern plastics without the romantic attachment to history seemingly
built into the wooden holders. It comes down to personal choice, or what
the manufacturer makes to fit, but at lease we learned on both.

Film was another consideration. You don't go to Ritz camera or Wal-Mart
to get 8x20 sheets of film. You don't pick up a box of Velvia in 20x24.
You are limited. This is where talking to the suppliers helped. Lotus
Cameras are beautiful, but no more so than the Bergger films and paper
they import into the USA. Nice film and really gorgeous paper. My first
intro to the paper was in 20x24 sheets I cut up for 8x20 contact
printing and it is nice stuff. The Ilford HP5+ looks great, as does the
Ilford paper we used. Ever wanted to try a camera with film supplied,
paper supplied and darkroom space-complete with leading experts at your
elbow-supplied? This was it. From technical analysis with a densitometer
to 30 years experience condensed into a concise lesson by Michael A.
Smith on how to read a negative, we got it.

Tailoring negatives to contact printing is a bit different from
enlarging and this was covered well. Jobo will probably be selling a few
more units due to our experience at this workshop and a few will be
processing by inspection as a result. A nice intro to good results with
both working methods.

Lenses are a subject of mystery when one works with these cameras and we
had some of the latest designs as well as older ones to work with. Few
camera dealers will stock these. Knowing the person you will be talking
to when contemplating a purchase will be a help if we decide to move up.
Jeff Wheeler of Quality Camera gave us help from the dealers
perspective, Ron Wisner on quality & historic lenses and other from
years of use. All good, solid information that will come in handy if I
am ever crazy enough to buy a camera almost too big to use. But, who
knows, maybe I will try it. Now that I have actually used some of them
and have results to show for it, a lot of the fear factor is gone.

All the camera makers and all the staff were accessible and helpful. The
Waterford School put on a good program, all the brainchild of a late
night idea by Tillman Crane. He couldn't sleep one night, had the idea
and sent off some e-mails to a few people and a new workshop was born.
It went well and we all learned something worthwhile. Ideas that will
carry on with our shooting from 35mm to as large a film size we want to
try.

I went out this morning(5 days later) shooting on a documentary project
on "The Fruit Way" in our community and as I composed an image on the
ground glass I could almost hear Michael & Paula under the darkcloth as
I paid even more attention to placement of water reflections in the
corner of the scene. Closer checking of every element. A bit more
thought in the process leading to the finished print. And, I was sure
glad my Linhof didn't weigh 40 pounds.(but I sure wouldn't mind one of
those beautiful Reis tripods)

The workshop was six days of photographing and learning that was worth
more than the cost. This kind of knowledge will save each of us a few
thousand dollars whether we buy a Mammoth camera or not. It will help
every time we set up an image. I am not an expert now with a huge
camera, but I do feel a lot more comfortable with the idea if I ever
decide to move up to the monster formats. Nothing looks quite like a
contact print. One made from huge negatives has its own life and just
might be worth the effort.

Just like swimming, all the theory in the world can't take the place of
getting in the water. This workshop was a first swim with lifeguards
aplenty. It is an experience I would be glad to repeat.

### My conclusion

If you have ever wondered about these super large cameras, this workshop
will answer your questions as well as give you a chance to photograph
with them. Even if you go to a well stocked pro-supplier, you won't be
shooting with such a variety of cameras. If you could find one, the film
cost alone would run around \$500, not to mention processing and the
time it would take to do so. You couldn't take a 20x24 off the premises
either.

The workshop was fun. Nice staff and good people to photograph with.
Facilities that are clean and open. It was a good experience and well
worth the time and effort.

### Information


    The Waterford Institute/Waterford School

    1590 East 9400 South
    Sandy, Utah 84093

    (801) 576-4900

    Contact Tillman Crane, head of the Photo Dept, for more information. He is
    already planning next years workshop. Times, dates and cost will be out
    soon.

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/workshop-ulf.html)
