Large Format Photography:The Zone VI field camera

The Zone VI field camera
------------------------

**Compiled by [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for [the
Large Format Page](.)**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Quick review by [Philip Greenspun](http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/philg/)

I just returned my Zone VI 4x5 field camera and I thought I'd let you
know why. Good point: the camera looks beautiful, with its polished
mahogany standards and gold-plated fixtures; people always stop to ask
you if it is an antique (with a Sinar, they just stop to ask if you are
sane).

Bad points:

1.  the camera is heavy and bulky, almost as bad as a Sinar F2 and not
    nearly as small as a Horseman FA
2.  the lensboards are big losers. First of all, they have to be almost
    forced into the camera since the clips don't retract far enough.
    Secondly, after laboriously removing a lens, one must then push the
    clips back to fold the camera (a Horseman would let you leave a
    small lens mounted so I hear). Finally, the dish around the rear
    element isn't large enough for either of the two spanner wrenches I
    tried to work, i.e. you have to spend \$150 for a special wrench or
    you can't share lenses with another camera.
3.  the camera would be way better if it had a collapsible focussing
    hood so that the ground glass was protected in transport and also so
    that one didn't have to carry a bulky focussing cloth
4.  folding up the camera is a tedious nightmare of unscrewing what
    seems like dozens of crudely knurled knobs -- not much fun on a
    freezing day.
5.  focussing involves manipulating knobs on both sides of the camera
6.  even with all knobs tightened, the standards seem to move without my
    wanting them to.

Using one of these for just a day will remind you of why they invented
Nikons.

### User's review by [Howard Lester](mailto:hlester@as.arizona.edu)

I purchased a ZONE VI 4x5" from ZONE VI in 1989 and have been quite
happy with it. I returned it once, for two reasons: The rear focusing
was not smooth, and one of the rotating clips was loose and needed to be
re-worked.

It has performed well ever since. It is extremely sturdy and robust;
unfortunately that partly contributes to it's relatively high weight of
6 lbs., as compared to the 3-1/2 lbs. of the typical Japanese cherrywood
cameras. The more obvious reason for the extra weight has already been
alluded to: it has rear focusing as well as front, allowing the camera
to extend the bellows to 22", compared to the usual 12" or 13" of the
others. The addition of rear focusing means more wood and metal.

I have never had any problems mounting lenses, using a cheap spanner
wrench, or mounting lensboards. The camera clips that hold the
lensboards work smoothly on mine. The side knobs that clamp down the
opposite focusing knobs DO loosen as you focus (a pain), but once you
lock those knobs down, they do NOT move. It is FAR more secure than a
simple clamp system used on some other field cameras. You can feel
confident that once everything is locked, the camera, with all its
adjustments, will stay where you set it. And, the camera has never moved
from the act of inserting a film holder EXCEPT when something wasn't
fully tightened.

The front standard WILL move back and forth, even after tightening, but
that causes no problems once the camera is focused and ready to shoot.

No, the camera does not have a collapsible focusing hood; instead I use
a \$15 plastic insert sold by Calumet to otherwise protect the fresnel
lens or ground glass. However, ANYthing to avoid the need for a focusing
cloth would be worthwhile on ANY large format camera!

Folding the camera can be a bit of a nuisance if you don't have
everything lined up just right, and no, it doesn't allow you to fold it
with a lens in place as some other cameras do, but it's not so tedious
once you learn the routine. Since we large format users \*typically\*
use just rise/fall and tilt the majority of the time, and the rear
focusing is not used too often, there are generally only four knobs to
loosen and two to re-tighten during the folding process.

DISADVANTAGES:

The real downside for me is that it's HEAVY. It's a royal pain to have
to schlep it and all the extra stuff around. Before buying the ZONE VI,
I had first borrowed a Tachihara for three months to help me decide if I
really wanted to go large format. I could put it, with 150mm lens folded
inside, three film holders, cloth, a Nikon FM to use as a light
meter(!).. all into a Lands' End cloth attache! And, I could use the
Tachihara on a lightweight Bogen 3001. But the ZONE VI requires at least
a Bogen 3021 - still more weight - and whatever else I've managed to
stuff into an internal frame backpack with side pockets makes for a
fairly heavy package by comparison.

Another downside: The bellows is so long that you MUST buy/use the
accessory bag bellows if you want to use full rise and fall with a 90mm
or wider lens. The bellows is so compressed when using a 90 that you
can't move it around. The short bellows of the other wooden cameras
have, in effect, more flexibility when compressed to the same length as
that of the ZONE VI. And, at short focal lengths, the operation of the
front standard is kind of "kludgy". It's not something I can describe in
writing. However, I HAVE gotten some excellent transparencies from the
90mm lens withOUT using a bag bellows. I just could not take advantage
of extensive rise and fall.

I was also disappointed that the \[overpriced\] accessory fresnel lens
does not have a grid.

I've thought about selling the ZONE VI and getting something lighter,
but every time I go through the entire argument, I stay with what I
have. All of its advantages, uh, "outweigh" the weight disadvantage. I
paid \$900 for it seven years ago. Is it worth the \$1400 or \$1500
they're now asking? I don't know, but at that price, for something
comparable, I'd certainly look at a Wisner, and others.

### Another user's review by [Kerry Thalmann](mailto:KThalmann@aol.com)

I used a Zone VI as my primary large format camera for about two years,
at which time I replaced it with a Wisner Technical Field Camera.
Comparisons to the Wisner are inevitable due to similarities in design
and features (the Zone VI was originally designed by Ron Wisner). Zone
VI has since made a few minor changes, but the design is still very
similar to the Wisner Traditional. In terms of functionality, the two
cameras are very similar (but not identical, the Wisner has slightly
longer bellows, for example), but in terms of quality, the Wisner wins
hands down. No comparison. Quite frankly, I don't know why any one would
purchase a new Zone VI (they can be bargains on the used market) when
the Wisner Traditional is much better built, has slightly longer
bellows, and only costs \$50 more.

I know that's a pretty strong condemnation of the Zone VI, so I'll back
it up with a few points. I bought my camera shortly after Zone VI was
bought by Calumet. I also bought it during a holiday sale promo. So,
demand was way up (I had to wait about two months to get my camera).
Perhaps this increased demand lead to some of the quality problems I
observed with my particular camera. Perhaps, this situation has been
corrected now that they have made it up the initial steep production
ramp.

These problems were the result of poor workmanship. Specifically, poor
fit and finish of the wooden parts. The finish on the camera was very
uneven (looked like someone just slapped on one thick, uneven coat of
varnish). One additional problem was the result of poor material
selection/process. I am referring to the gold plated hardware "feature".
This finish was very thin and became very pitted and black in spots
after a very short time (keep in mind I only used this camera for two
years). The front standard was especially bad. When I called Zone VI,
they told me I needed to polish the hardware (in spite of their claim
that the gold plated hardware "will never tarnish"). I used the polish
they recommended (Rubin Brite - a jeweler's rouge). Which did improve
the appearance, but also stripped off much of the remaining thin gold
plating exposing the bare brass underneath.

Positive points. I did like the "easy-open bail" feature. Made it easy
to insert film holders without disturbing the camera position. Although,
I prefer the look of the Wisner red leather bellows, the vinyl coated
Zone VI bellows were better suited to working in the often rainy climate
where I live (NW Oregon).

    Max. Bellows: 18"
    Weight: 6 lbs.
    Folded Dimensions: 7.75" x 9.5" x 3.75"
    Actual New Price: $1395 (from Calumet 1-800-CALUMET)

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/zoneVI.html)


