Scanning black and white negative film with the Microtek Artixscan 1800F
------------------------------------------------------------------------

**by [Scott Rosenberg](http://www.srosenberg.com/) © 2005 for
[largeformatphotography.info](/)**

**Introduction:**

**T**he digital workflow is pretty much ubiquitous in the world of fine
art color photography these days. The technology has gotten so good that
we are now able to produce prints with a vibrancy and clarity never
before possible. Modern scanning and printing technologies have gotten
so good, in fact, that for the first time since slide film has been
available, prints are actually starting to rival transparencies. While
reflected media will never look exactly like transmitted media, the
digital workflow of today is enabling photographers to produce prints
closer to their originals than ever before.\
\
After seeing what was possible with the new digital darkroom, I quickly
embraced the workflow for my color printing. Initially, however, I was
less enthusiastic about making black and white prints using these same
technologies. To my eye, I still preferred prints made in a traditional
darkroom. However, after recently seeing black and white prints from the
latest in digital printing, I feel like that gap has been bridged
considerably, and set out to determine how best to scan black and white
negatives using my Microtek Artixscan 1800F.\
\
To gather a list of best practices, I spoke to several photographers
whose work I admire and who are printing black and white images from
digital files made from film. While most are using the same scanner as
I, their individual methodologies shared little else. I therefore
decided to start from square one, consider every possibility I could
think of, and let the results speak for themselves. It should be noted
that there will always be sources of variation that can not be
controlled, and my findings are specific to the equipment, myself
included, in my personal workflow. In other words, your mileage may
vary.

\
\

**Experimental Design:**

**H**aving not much else to go on, I decided to scan a sheet of black
and white film every way my scanner was capable of:\
\
                     1. As a Black and White Negative\
                     2. As a Black and White Positive\
                     3. As a Color Negative\
                     4. As a Color Positive\
\
Since I set out to determine the scanning workflow that will lead to the
finest print, and not the amount of input required post scanning, I
worked with each file until I got that individual image to look just as
I would want it to before having it printed, taking care to get all the
files as closely matched as possible. Positive scans would have to be
inverted; color scans would have each of their three channels (Red,
Green, Blue) evaluated to determine which one yielded superior results.
I worked on each file as I would any other in preparation for printing,
and while no prints were made, these master files were then scrutinized
and a best practice was decided upon.\
\
Since I was primarily interested in assessing my scanners capability
regarding tone and resolution of fine detail, I selected the image shown
below, as it contains a full range of tonal values, from the deep
shadows found under the porch to the bright whites of the dogwood
blooms, as well as some very fine elements in the detail of the
rough-cut timbers and the bark of the trees.\
\

![](http://www.srosenberg.com/Website7/images/dagorbarn1800f.jpg)\
*Farmhouse and Dogwood*

\
\

**A Comparison of the Color Channels:**

**T**he first thing I wanted to check was if there was a difference in
the red, green, and blue channels in the color scans. Since the final
print would be black and white, I could use any one of these three
channels independently of the other two, or use all three simply by
converting the RGB image to greyscale. Shown below are detail scans
illustrating each channel, as well as the RGB image once converted to
greyscale.\

![](http://www.srosenberg.com/Website7/images/ChannelsQT.jpg)\
*Red, Blue, Green, and RGB Channel Comparison*

\
\

The green channel, while a little grainier, clearly has retained the
most detail. Remember, these scans represent a very small area of the
overall image, and as such, the increased grain apparent in the green
channel is not really a concern, as it will be completely undetectable
in the final print.\
\
Now that the sharpest channel of the color scans has been determined, we
can take a look at how the black and white scans compare to the green
channel of the color scans.\

\
\

**Detail Scans and Conclusions:**

**H**aving determined that the green channel from the color scans was in
fact the sharpest, I now set out to compare it to the black and white
scans. Shown below are detail scans illustrating how the black and white
scans compared to the green channel alone of the color scans.\

![](http://www.srosenberg.com/Website7/images/dagorbarnbarkQT.jpg)\
*Detail Scans Comparing All Four Master Files*

\
\

These scans are slices from the tree to the right of the farmhouse. The
slices from the color scans clearly show more texture and detail than
those scanned as black and white. It is difficult to tell at this size,
but when enlarged further, the color positive scan shows the most
detail.\
\

These scans are slices from knotty boards just above the window on the
farmhouse. Again, the slices from the color scans are sharper and
exhibit more detail than the black and white scans, with the color
positive scan showing the most detail when enlarged yet further than
what is shown here.\

![](http://www.srosenberg.com/Website7/images/dagorbarnwoodQT.jpg)\
*Detail Scans Comparing All Four Master Files*

\
\

As can be seen in the detail images above, there was little difference
observed in the tonal range of the scans. There was, however, an
appreciable difference in the amount of detail captured, the master file
containing the most detail comes from the green channel when the film
was scanned as a color positive. This surprised me, as these are the
settings farthest from what was actually scanned - a black and white
negative. It was my initial belief that scanning the film as a black and
white negative would yield the best scans. So surprised was I by these
findings that I duplicated this experiment with an entirely different
black and white negative, this second experiment returning precisely the
same results.\
\
For my particular workflow, that is to say my scanner with me at the
wheel, the best scans of black and white negative film are obtained by
scanning the film as a color positive, inverting the file, and then
using only the green channel.\

#### [View/Add comments](http://largeformatphotography.info/lfforum/topic/504762.html)
