Large Format Photography: Bellows extension exposure compensation

Bellows extension exposure compensation
---------------------------------------

**Compiled by [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for [the
Large Format Page](.)**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Formulas

**[Michael Gudzinowicz:](mailto:bg174@FreeNet.Carleton.CA)**

Multiply the marked f-stop by (1 + M), where M is the magnification on
the ground glass. Alternatively, mark & measure the position of the lens
at infinity focus, and then measure the ground glass to lens distance at
close focus. Divide the total extension at close focus by the former
number (near infinity, which should be close to the focal length for
most LF lenses), and the resultant f-stop factor will be the same (or
close enough).

**By [Richard Koser](mailto:rkoser@worldnet.att.net)**

When the bellows is extended beyond infinity focus for close-up work, an
exposure FACTOR must be determined and applied. Two convenient ways of
finding the FACTOR are:

a\) When the camera is focused at infinity, note a point on the camera
and another on the lens (e.g., diaphragm) such that the distance between
them is equal to the focal length (call it F). Then, when the bellows is
extended for close-up focus, the extension between those two points will
be greater than F (call it E). The exposure factor will be (E/F)
squared. For example, extending the bellows to twice-F to focus for an
object-to-image ratio of 1:1, the FACTOR will be 4.

b\) Measure the object width or height (call it O) and that of it's image
on the ground-glass (call it o). The exposure factor will be (o/O+1)
squared. For example, focusing for an object-to-image ratio of 1:1, the
FACTOR will be (1/1 + 1) squared, or 4.

Applying the FACTOR:

If 4 times the exposure is required (per the examples above), open up
the lens 2 stops or increase the exposure time 4-fold.

Two complications often arise.

Firstly, it is hard, maybe even impossible, to measure bellows extension
when using swings, tilts, rise/fall and combinations thereof; thus the
object-to-image measurements are useful (indeed, Calumet offers a handy
plastic template, based on that principle, calibrated directly in
stops).

Secondly, FACTORs of 2, 4, 8, etc. obviously correspond to 1, 2, 3, etc.
stops; what about a FACTOR of 3?? To convert FACTORs to stops, use a
scientific calculator; (log FACTOR/log 2) or (ln FACTOR/ln 2) equals
stops. For a FACTOR of 3, (log 3/log 2) equals (.48/.3) equals 1.6
stops.

**By [Roy Harrington](mailto:roy@harrington.com)**

The formula (Extension/FocalLength) \*\*2 is basically correct. The
focal length is basically the distance from the center of lens (where
the aperture is) to the film plane when the lens is focused at infinity.
So a 12inch lens will have 12 inches of bellows when focused at
infinity. You move the lens farther away from the film in order to focus
on something closer. The new distance of the lens from the film is the
"extension" (not the distance to what your focused on). For instance if
you move the lens to 24 inches from the film, objects another 24 inches
in front of the lens will be in focus. The image will be the same size
as the object i.e. 1:1 magnification and the bellows compensation will
be (24/12)\*\*2 = 4 or 2 stops more exposure needed.

Personally, I like to do the calculation directly with the aperture and
thereby eliminate the square in the formula. For example the 12 inch
lens at 24 inch extension just doubles the effective aperture number so
f/16 is really f/32. Its very easy to use the aperture scale on the
front of the lens as a visual aid in this calculation. If you had an
8inch lens f/8 just becomes f/N when you have N inches of extension.
Many of the lenses have 1/3 stop marks and if you can interpolate
between the full stop markings and use inchs, mm, cm etc you can fairly
easily figure out what compensation to make without a calculator or any
other fancy device.

Some examples if my description is not clear. 1/3 stop values approx:
f/8,9,10 f/11,12.5,14 f/16,18,20 f/22,25,28 f/32,36,40 f/45

    Lens:        Extension:      Compens:
    8in          12.5in           1 1/3 stops  -- f/8 to f/12.5
    180mm        220mm            2/3 stops    -- f/18 to f/22
    125mm        200mm            1 1/3 stops  -- f/12.5 to f/20
    5in          7in              1 stop   (think f/10 to f/14)

The nice thing about this is the change can be made right on the lens
without even counting the 1/3 stops.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Computing tricks

#### Using the relationships between f/stops

**By [Nicholas F. Hanks](mailto:nickdc@mail.erols.com)**

We're going to use the relationships between f/stops to determine the
additional exposure needed when extending the bellows. First, consider
the bellows at infinity as an f/stop type of number. That is, say your
120mm lens is "f/"120, but to bring things down to familiar f/'s, well
divide everything by 10, so call it "f/"12. We're now dealing in
centimeters, but it doesn't much matter. Let's say you move your bellows
out to 160 mm. We'll call that "f/"16. What this says is that we've gone
from "f/"12 to "f/"16 which is about one stop. So we've doubled our
exposure requirements. Either open up one stop or double your time.
Similarly, if we extend to 240mm it becomes "f/"24, which is two stops
more exposure or four times the time.

This becomes a little confusing when working with odd numbers. A 90 mm
lens extended to 130mm is the difference between f/9 and f/13 which is
somewhere between familiar territory. Take a look down at the f/ scale
and make an estimate, and it's probably good enough.

It's also hard to know where to measure to. It should be from the iris
to film plane, but sometimes the infinity setting doesn't seem to
measure what I would expect it to based on the lens' focal length. It's
best just to measure at infinity, then measure at the extension and make
the calculation.

While the method seems whimsical, it is based on sound engineering
principles. Remember that the f/stop is the ratio of the diameter of the
iris divided into the focal length. An f/8 with a 120mm lens would be
15mm in diameter. However, the amount of light is dependent on the area
(pi x r\^2). The area or a 15mm hole is 175.7 square mm. To double the
light you would double the area to 353.4 sq.mm. This gives us a 21.2mm
diameter hole which gives an f/ of 120mm/21.2mm which is f/5.6. If you
do the calculations for f/4 you'll see that the hole is twice the
diameter (8 divided by 4) but four times the light area. Conversely,
f/16 is 1/2 the hole diameter but 1/4 the light. Notice that there's a
square relationship here.

So what?!!

As it turns, as you move the lens out from the film plane, the amount of
area on which light falls also increases in size and thus decreases in
density by a square relationship as well. Thus, as you move a 120mm lens
to 240mm, although twice the distance, the area on which light projects
is 4 times as much (2 squared) resulting in 1/4 the density.

Thus, the f/ scale on the lens with which we are all familiar provides
us with a handy scale showing a square relationship which we can also
use as a key for our bellows extension.

#### A Fast Method to Calculate Bellows Extension Factor

**By [John A. Cook](mailto:john12420@msn.com)**

There is an old saying that as photographers get older they don?t get
any better, but they do get faster. During my many years as a studio
product photographer, I never had the luxury of spending a lot of time
agonizing over technique. There was always a budget and a deadline
nipping at my heels.

Of necessity, I learned many shortcuts to get through the mountains of
products I was assigned to shoot. This is one of them.

This method for calculating bellows extension is predicated on the
relationship between the extension of the bellows (in inches) and common
f-stop numbers. It requires no fancy gadgets to purchase nor algebraic
formulae to memorize. You don?t even need batteries.

Step One:

Make a permanent, durable list of the following F-numbers. (You can also
find them on your light meter.) Note that they are shown in 1/3 stops.
Those with asterisks indicate "whole" stops:


    3.5
    4 *
    4.5
    5
    5.6 *
    6.3
    7.1
    8 *
    9
    10
    11 *
    13
    14
    16 *
    18
    20
    22 *
    25
    28
    32 *

Step Two:

Calculate the focal length of your lenses in inches, rather than
millimeters, by dividing by 25.4. Photography is not an exact science -
it?s okay to round off these numbers.

90mm = 3.5" 150mm = 6" 210mm = 8.26" 240mm = 9.4" 300mm = 11.8"

Step three:

When you are ready to make the exposure, measure the view camera?s
extension from the ground glass to the lens board in inches. Measure
from the center of the lens board to the center of the ground glass so
as to not introduce errors from extreme swings and/or tilts.

Compare this distance to the focal length (or flange distance) of the
lens and relate these two numbers to the above list of f-stops. Their
difference will indicate the number of stops you must increase the
exposure.

For example: a 210mm or 8" lens with 11" of bellows requires a one stop
exposure increase (the difference between f8 and f11).

A 240mm or 9.4" lens with 14" of bellows requires a one and one- third
stop increase (difference between f9 and f14).

A 90mm or 3.5" lens with 4.5" of bellows requires a two-thirds stop
exposure increase. And so on.

This method is not accurate for telephoto lenses, whose optical center
is not near the lens board. To ensure always having a bellows measuring
device handy, I sewed a cloth tailor's tape measure to the edge of my
focusing cloth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Devices

#### A tape

Making a "custom" tape measure means you can leave the calculator at
home. Stanley makes a very small (approx 1.5" x 1.5" x .3") version of
their spring-retracting "carpenter's" tape measure. Do the calculations,
(once) mark the back of the tape, and you can find exposure comp in a
few seconds. It is especially useful for telephoto lens designs that
don't conform to the usual exposure comp formulas. I have one marked at
1/3 stop increments using different colored marks for each lens. Works
great. **[Chris Ellinger](mailto:%0Aellinger@umich.edu)**

### A fixed scale

Where I only have one lens, a 127mm (5 inch), I figured that a simple
scale on the bed next to the focusing rails calibrated in both stops and
time increase would do the job. Probably many people have already
thought of this where it is so simple but where this is all new to me,
ignorance is bliss. I used a paint program on the computer with the
measured values printed on heavy card stock which I cut to size. The
scale is held in place with the three screws that hold the bed together
so there is no modification of the camera and it is simple to change. If
I had two lenses a second scale could be put on the other side as well,
three lenses and I'm in trouble, but I probably couldn't afford them
anyway. I've attached a JPEG picture to show the first revision I made
before I noticed where the screws would be so I've moved stuff slightly
so the screws don't cover some of the printing on the scale. With
modification this could be used on any large format camera. **Richard**
![](bellows-scale.jpeg)

#### Geoff Bowker's bellows extension charting package

Here is [a small excel spreadsheet](Bell_Ext.xls) that will calculate f
stop corrections for any lenses. just feed in the focal length and it
will produce a grid of f stop corrections and also a useful graph in 1/4
stop increments.

#### Philipp Salzgeber's QuickDisc

The [QuickDisc](http://www.salzgeber.at/disc/index.html) is a simple and
useful tool. The use of the QuickDisc involves no calculation, it is
lightweight, easy to replace and free for personal use. It consists of
two pieces of cardboard, the disc, and the measuring strip.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/bellows-factor.html)
