Large format photography: how to manage your film

How to manage your film
-----------------------

**by [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for the [Large
Format Page](.)**

*Summary: this article explains how to load and unload film holders,
store sheets after exposure, and file them so that if you shoot backup
sheets so you can adjust development. It emphasizes methods that I use
for a long trip in the field when I expose a hundred or more sheets
before returning to the lab.*

You won't have to do anything described here if you shoot
quickloads/readyloads, which tells you how useful they are ! One
unloading/reloading cycle as described below with 20 holders takes me
about two hours that I'd rather use for sleep or rest. However this is
not always an option, if you are shooting larger formats than 4x5, or
the emulsion you prefer is not available in quickloads/readyloads. Also
Kerry told me that despite (or maybe because ?) shooting 35mm-like
quantities of Velvia, David Muench doesn't use quickloads.

If you shoot less film than the number of film holders you have, you
could leave all the film into the holders and give them directly to the
lab, marking with tape or post-it notes which ones you want processed.
However, some labs will charge you an extra fee if you don't give them
the film in boxes. If you are just beginning, and don't have yet an
empty film box, try to ask your lab for one. Despite the apparent
fragility, those boxes are light-tight when handled properly.

### Taking notes

For each exposure, I write the following information in my notebook

Number of the film holder being used (each face of my holders is
numbered, between 1 and 40). This is useful in the short term for
knowing which image is in which holder, and in the long term to identify
leaking holders.

Number of the sheet of film used in the trip. Useful for overall
reference.

If the sheet of film is a backup (identical image), number of the
back-up sheet of film used in the trip, otherwise this field is blank.
This is useful once you get home for retrieving backup sheets so you can
adjust development.

Description of the image

Technical info (lense, fstop/speed, filters, special processing...)

It really helps if for each exposure, you make exactly one backup. Then
you know mechanically that each odd-numbered sheet is processed
directly, while each corresponding even-numbered sheet is a backup.

### Finding a dark place

If you're staying in a motel, the bathroom usually works fine provided
it has no windows. Examine it before renting the room. You can block the
light beneath the door with a towel. The light from a small window can
be blocked by hanging a dark cloth with duct tape.

Otherwise, besides a few creative options that I tried in the past, such
as blocking all the light from the sky in your car with tarps, or
working in a sleeping bag, your best option is to use a changing tent. A
changing tent has a semi-rigid (collapsible structure) and is a
considerable improvement over a simple changing bag.

### Changing tents

The Harrison tent seems to be the more popular. It sets up like a
free-standing dome tent, with two diagonal poles which go outside, and
provides a large flat working surface inside. Once collapsed, it takes
little room, which is why I favor it while traveling other than by car.
I have the smallest model, and although it is advertised for 4x5 use, I
find it works fine with 5x7. The Shadow Box has a very similar design.

However, the Photoflex/Calumet changing tent is also worth considering.
The new model sets up instantly, unlike the Harrison. Even though I have
the older model, I can still set it up in 15 seconds. For a smaller
footprint than the Harrison, it has a taller volume, which I find
convenient. The arms openings are more spread-out (sort of working with
a Microsoft natural keyboard as opposed to a normal keyboard) which I
find personally more comfortable. The drawbacks are that it collapses to
a flat but big package, and the metallic rings inside can get in the
way. There are also rumors that it is less light-tight than the
Harrison, and therefore wouldn't allow you to work in direct sunlight,
which I avoid anyways.

### Unloading film for processing

I separate holders is three piles.

-   Those for which one side is to be processed immediately, while the
    other is a backup. the side to be processed is put on top.
-   Those for which the two sides are to be processed immediately
-   Those for which the two sides are backups.

I first unload all the film that I want immediately processed (ie all
the sheets not marked as backups) into one separate "process" film box.
I put the pile 1 into on side of the changing tent with the "process"
box on the other side, close the tent, open the box, unload the top side
of every holder, close the box, and then unload pile 2. At the end of
the trip, I will just send directly the "process" box(es) to the lab.
All the backups will be unloaded into a different box, so I am sure that
I never process at the same time two sheets which have identical images,
but rather always have in a different place the two versions, should a
problem arise (for instance, last summer an otherwise good lab opened in
daylight a "process" box).

### Unloading and filing film for backups

Inside the "backup" box, I have four dividers, which are just the pieces
of cardboard in which the film was originally sandwiched. Kodak gives
you two separate pieces, whereas Fuji gives you on hinged piece, which I
prefer to use for dividing film. I have notched the four dividers with:
no notch, one notch, two notches, three notches, to indicate the tens.
As dividers, you could also use sheets of papers, or the mylar wrappers
in which your film came. The idea is that I am going to use the number
of the back-up sheet to be able to retrieve it later by counting the
order of the sheet in the "backup" box. However, it is pretty difficult
to count reliably more than 10 sheets at a time, so that's why I have
the dividers.

Then I pile up the holders who contain either one or two backup sheets,
exactly in the order of numbered backup sheets, introduce them into the
changing tent with the "backup" box, and unload them into their
dividers.

Once I have finished using a box for the unloading section, I
immediately tape it to prevent accidental opening. Each of the boxes is
clearly marked, either "Film", "Process", or "Backup".

### A variant of the system for shorter/lighter trips

On backpacking outings, I take less film holders (therefore reload
often) and might shoot less film total. Often I will take only one empty
box and divide it in two. One part contains the film to be processed,
the other part contains the backups. I do the unloading sequentially by
film holder, while looking at the note book, introducing the holders in
the changing bag sorted by their numbers. This method allows for faster
unloading and saves carrying one film box.

### Cleaning holders

Now all the holders are empty. It is time to get rid of the dust.

I use a paintbrush. I first clean the outside of the holders with the
black side of the dark slides closed. Then I remove one dark slide,
clean the top, reinsert only slightly the dark slide with the white side
up, clean up the dark slide, tap the holder in my hands while holding it
vertically, clean up the inside and the film rails, flip out the bottom,
clean it, slide down the dark slide to a point where one centimeter of
the film rail is still visible, and repeat the same operation with the
other side. If at home, I'll also from time to time use canned air.

I then shake the dust out the changing tent, and I am ready to reload.

### Reloading holders

For now see [this article](loading.html). Just two additional
precisions: (a) you don't have to worry about leaving finger marks on
the film, because unless your hands are very dirty or sweaty, they will
be washed out by the developer. (b) the main error in loading is not to
have the film under the two rails. I recommend you feel the extremities
of the rails with your fingers to make sure the film is under.

The way I tend to work with a changing tent is to pile up all the empty
holders on one side, the film box on the other side. As holders gets
reloaded, I pile them under the film box.

### Storing film boxes and holders

To protect film from heat, I store all the film boxes and holders not
currently in use in an ice-chest. I do not put ice in it due to the risk
of leakage and film damage, however, I cover it with a pillow or
sleeping bag to protect it from direct sunlight.

### Processing the backup film

Please keep in mind while reading the following that I use almost
exclusively transparency film.

It is better to process exposed film promptly for optimal results. For
instance, after a few months, Velvia tends to have a (very subtle
magenta shift) and to loose a bit of speed. In the while, refrigerating
the film will keep the degradation minimal.

You end up by knowing how much you alter the processing of the second
sheet by experience. What I suggest is that you ask the lab technician
for his advice to begin. After you've seen the results a couple dozens
of times, you'll be able to guess with good accuracy. A few tips:

-   stick with either 1/2 or 1/3 of stops.
-   To determine the amount of push, look at the highlight areas, and
    compare them with the average tone to see how much push they can
    take without washing out. Since you don't want to puch beyond +1.5
    stops (results in excessive contrast and murky shadows with all the
    films I have tried, although in some cases +2 can give usable
    results), all you have is to decide between a few values.
-   Be careful with pulling. Film is more sensitive to pulling than to
    pushing. The contrast is seriously reduced, and for optimal results,
    you will try to avoid pulling beyond -2/3 or even -1/2 stops (in
    some cases -1 will give usable results). Think about that when you
    are exposing.
-   If not processing yourself, you must always use the same lab, and
    they must run a carefully calibrated processing system. You must
    also always use the same light box.

You need different clearly marked film boxes, one for each type of
processing (eg -2/3,-1/3,0,+1/2,+2/3,+1) What I do is introduce in the
changing tent all the back-up boxes and only one processing box at a
time, begining with the most populated box (hopefully the "0" box !).
The notebook is open and I look at it while retrieving all the relevant
sheets with my hands in the tent. When this is done, I upgrade the
numbers on the notebook, taking into account the sheets which are no
longer there, and reiterate with the next most populated box.

You never have enough of a good thing. If your image was great and the
exposure correct, process the backup. You'll be happy to have it if your
first original gets lost or damaged. You can carry it around and show it
off, and not worry. You could file it with a stock agency. In case this
additional \$1.5 to process your 4x5 backup sounds expensive, remember
that a 4x5 duplicate costs \$30. If you didn't like your image, don't
process the backup.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[View or add
comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/how-to-manage-film.html)


