Large format photography: Light leaks

Light leaks
-----------

**Compiled by [Q.-Tuan Luong](http://www.terragalleria.com/) for [the
Large Format Page](.)**

Some photographers (like me) are plagued by these problems, which are
among the worse frustrations of LF. Some have never experienced them.
There are zillions of different sources of light leaks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A summary

-   Holder: Leaks at light trap for dark slide. Leaks because its
    warped. Leaks from defective dark slide or dark slide doesn't fit.
    Leak at loading flap.
-   Camera back: Leaks because its warped. Because the light trap keeps
    the holder from seating properly. Leaks because something else keeps
    the holder from seating.
-   Camera body: Leaks from cracks or bad joints. Possible around screws
    or rivets holding parts on. Leaks from ill fitting lens boards.
    Leaks from holes in lens board.
-   Bellows: Pin holes at corners or elswhere. Doesn't fit at ends where
    its fastened to camera body and front.
-   Leaks from shutters sticking open, perhaps only a pin hole opening.
    Can also be caused by defective shutter leaves. Check both cocked
    and after tripping. Some shutters have hard rubber leaves and can
    have pin holes in them.
-   Reflective something inside camera. Light outside of the image area
    being reflected onto the film.
-   Film is getting fogged somewhare other than in the camera.

**Richard Knoppow**

### A few diagnosis remarks

If the fogging extends past the borders from the rails in the holder it
has to be coming from elsewhere than from the camera. If many negatives
have identical an identical or nearly identical fog pattern it may come
from a leak in the film box. **Richard Knoppow**

Pinhole leaks would be more likely to look like superimposed images than
oblong blobs. **Paul Butzi**

If the "light leaks" do not have sharp edges but they do have edges, i.
e. there is not a bright area which gradually fades out, this must be
not too far from the film. If the leak were in the bellows or in the
front board then I would expect the bright areas to have foggy edges.
**Eberhard Funke**

### Leaking film holders

#### Common problems

Check the condition of the hinges on the loading flap. If they are worn
that could be your leak. Is the slide seating all the way down into the
holder? Maybe you have a small hairline crack at the seam of the flap
possibly?

One place they leak is the place where you pull out the dark slide. Ever
take a holder apart? A friend and I did when we where building a vacumn
4x5 film holder for our astrogrpah (that's another story). Inside the
"top" of the holder, behind the metal part, is a peice of light brass -
it looks like a curved comb. over top of this metal is a peice of black
felt. What happens over tiem is the felt wears down, "teeth" on the comb
loose thier spring and fail to hold up the felt in place, or break all
together. Normally when you pull back a darkslide, the curved part of
the "comb" springs back up into place, blocking off light. Older
holders, the felt may have holes in it, allowing small light leaks to
escape through. Also, the felt may be very dirty, so no matter how clean
the rest of the holder is, you continually get scratches and dust marks
on your flim, carried in off the felt onto the emulsion of your film
from the darkslide being pushed in. **Joseph O'Neil**

You can check these with a flash light by folding down the loading flap
so you can look straight into the holder and shining the light right
into the slot for the slide. **Richard Knoppow**

#### Marking holders for identification

If large format users would use a notch-encoding scheme to number their
holders, it would be MUCH easier to exactly pinpoint a leaky holder. I
(and several other large format people I'm friends with) take miniature
files and notch the flap with the files. For me I use a v-notch for 1-4,
square-notch for 5, and a half-round- notch for 10. Thus, the holder
that I've designated to hold sheets 9 and 10 has a square-notch and 4
v-notches on the 9-side, and a half-round-notch on the 10 side. Should
either side of that holder ever leak, it'll be really obvious as to
which holder (and side) is the culprit. NOTE: the notch goes into the
side that contacts the film, since light hits the ends of the holder at
an angle, there is no need to notch both sides of the flap. Be sure to
clean off the residue with an X-acto knife and clean the plastic dust
out of the holder when you're done. **Dean Barto**

#### To identify leaking holders among a large set

The best that we came up with was to load them with the cheapest paper
that you can get (pre cut to 4x5 will save time) and take them out into
the sun and twist each one so that all surfaces face the sun (remember
paper is a lot slower than film therefore keep them in the sunlight
about 5 times longer than usual) Advnatage: you can load them under a
safelight. If you are really cheap and can spend the time, you can use
the same sheet of paper for more than one holder to narrow in on faulty
ones. \[Algorithm to determine the minimum number of light sensitive
sheets to identify all leaky holders left as an exercise for the
reader\] Don't forget to number all holders (and matching sheets of
paper before you start). **Sandor**

### Leaking camera

#### How to find a leak

I would take the camera into a darkened room and remove the lens board.
I would shine a light into the camera body to see if there is a light
leak in the bellows or the back. If no light can be seen, put the lens
board back on and take the back off and shine the light in from that end
and inspect for leaks in that direction. More than likely, you will find
the leak and patch it with black tape and be back on the road in no
time. **Lee Carmichael**

Just to suggest another, more definitive, way of finding those pesky
pinhole leaks: if you are in a university and have access to a
photomultiplier tube (try a physics lab), I would give that a try using
an ordinary flash inside the bellows. This way you can look at a meter
rather than trust your eyes to find even the smallest pinhole light
leak.**JohnK**

#### Flare problem due to excessive coverage

Another cause of this sort of problem is flare due to the sun or another
bright light source out of the composed frame, bouncing light off the
bellows and dumping the non-image light on part of the film. Since the
lens reverses the image position on film, the upper right of your photo
would be lower left on the ground glass - the sun, outside the frame to
the upper right could be reflected by the bellows to the lower left area
of the GG/film causing fogging. The solution is to use a lens hood,
compendium bellows, or a card to prevent sources outside the composed
frame from illuminating the lens and reflecting off the interior of the
bellows. **Michael Gudzinowicz**

Finally, as a reward for those who slogged thru all of that, I have one
last note - this I discovered today. A friend had an image spoiled by
what looked like a light leak - the fogging appeared as a splash of
light from the top of the frame. We examined the negative, and it seemed
that, perhaps, it was caused by the image of the sun, which was just
barely out of the frame. It looked rather as if the image of the sun
fell on the beveled edge of the readyload film holder - around the
frame, the bevel slopes \*in\* toward the film. And it looked to me like
the image of the sun fell on this bevel, and reflected off and was
splashed across the film. Ick. I think the moral of the story is that if
the sun is just outside the frame, use a lens hood and adjust it very
carefully. **Paul Butzi**.

#### Holder not sitting light-tight against camera

I suggest this: once you insert the holder, try wrapping the darkcloth
around it and the back, leaving just enough to pull the slide. Or maybe
wrap the entire back and holder, clip it shut with clothespins, and pull
the slide inside there. It sounds like the holder is not seating
light-tight against the camera. I think it's occasional possibly due to
moisture changes in the atmosphere causing the wood to warp slightly.
**David Meiland**

Would it be possible to put some black felt where the cutfilm holder
rests against the back? **Robert Peters**

I had a problem with light leaks when I first started in 4 x 5. Do not
take the dark slide out until you are ready to shoot. Replace it
immediately after you shoot. I ran into my light leak problem by putting
just the corner of the dark slide in first. You have to put the slide in
perfectly straight, or you get a light leak. **Rob**

I have old wooden film holders that have been a great deal of trouble
with light leaks for the two years or so that I've been trying to use
them. I just came back from a trip and this time I kept the dark cloth
on the camera during exposures and guess what? No light leaks on any of
the film, a first! I thought that the leaks had ocurred in handling the
film holders or even carrying them around, but this seems to indicate
that the leaks ocurr only when opening and closing the dark slides.
**Frank Kolwicz**

Other possibilities that come to mind are: not getting the holder seated
before pulling the dark slide, shifting the holder when pulling the dark
slide. Basically anything that might pull the holder away from the
camera back. If you routinely shoot straight up, are those more likely
to be fogged? The weight of the holder might be pulling it away from the
back due to weakened springs. **Paul Butzi**

### Leaking preloaded film systems

Many people have reported problems with light leaks using preloaded
systems, especially the kodak readyloads and/or polaroid back. Look at
the [diagnosis and tips to avoid problems](holders.html#readyloads).

### Leaks outside of the camera

How and where do you load your holders? Do you wear, perhaps, a
wristwatch with a luminescent face? (Yes, I \*have\* fogged film that
way). **Paul Butzi**

If the fogging happens on the unexposed-but-processed film, try a
different lab. If it still shows up, I'd say you're handling it wrong
and you'll have to look at your environment (Don Nelson's point about
fluorescents being able to fog film after being turned off is correct,
in my experience). **Pete Bergstrom**

Two thoughts: 1) is the box you transport your exposed negative to the
film lab in light tight? 2) Are you sure these "blobs" are not
processing failures of some kind. I had a roll of 35mm E6 butchered on
me last year by a "professional" lab, and some of your blobs look a
little like what I had on my roll of film. Either that, or could there
be light leaks in the lab somewhere ? **Joseph O'Neil**

#### [View or add comments](http://www.greenspun.com/com/qtluong/photography/lf/leaks.html)
