Spreadsheets to help the focussing process

Spreadsheets to help the focussing process
------------------------------------------

Part of
[largeformatphotography.info](http://www.largeformatphotography.info/).

#### An spreadsheet for determining plane of focus and depth of field using Merklinger's method

**by [Eirik Berger](mailto:eirik.berger@lundblad.no) © 2002**

I made a spreadsheet (Excel) which helps you to determine the plane of
sharp focus. It also gives you information about areas where you have
acceptable sharpness at different apertures. This table is a perfect
tool in the field, print one table for each lens. You need to input:

-   the focal length of your lens (insert at top of the spreadsheet)
-   the estimate or measure of the distance J between lens and plane of
    sharp focus.

The spreadsheet gives yo the plane of sharp focus at different lengths
(A) between lens and film. The little table at the bottom tells you in
what area you have acceptable focus. The "math" is based on the content
of Merklinger's articles "The Scheimpflug rule" part 1-4 and "Depth of
field for view cameras" part 1-2.

Here is an example: the focal length is 90mm, and the distance (J) from
the lens to the "hinge line" where the plane of sharp focus meets the
"parallel to film" (PTF) plane is set to 175 cm. And then we want the
angle of the plane of sharp focus to be 60 degrees (0 degrees is upwards
along the film plane). The tilt-angle of the lens is 2,9 degrees (or 3
to make it simple) Then we can read out of the table that the lens to
film distance (A) must be 93 mm. The plane of sharp focus will "rotate"
around the hinge line beneath the lens. Then we decide to use aperture
f64, in the lower table we see that g=3,84mm (or 4mm to make it simple).
Then you count 4 mm up and down from 93 mm and determine the near limit
and far limit of the zone of acceptable focus. At aperture 64 the zone
of acceptable focus is between 36 and 104 degrees. If you use a
different aperture the outer limits of the zone will change accordingly.

[Download the Excel file](excel/scheimpflugENG.xls)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Spreadsheats to estimate on-film resolving power

**by [Frank Loeffel](mailto:frank.loeffel@gmx.ch) © 2003**

These spreadsheets try to estimate on-film resolving power based on
defocus, film resolution and lens resolution. The premise is that final
resolution is more interesting when focusing than resolution solely
based on a circle of confusion.

There are two versions. One is for large format work, where defocus can
be determined by the displacement at the ground glass. The other one is
for medium (and small) format work, where defocus can be determined by
displacement at the lenses' DOF scale.

[Download LF Excel file](excel/LF-resolving.xls)

[Download MF Excel file](excel/MF-resolving.xls)
